Jira: Getting Started

Course Overview

Jira is one of the most widely used project planning and status tracking tools in the world.

We'll cover core Jira concepts and terminology, creating an updating issues, using and customizing boards, searching for and reporting on issues, creating and sharing dashboards, utilizing code commit information in Jira, and creating a project.

We will follow a team for a start up company, carved rock fitness, as they prepare for the opening of their high tech gym and Climbing Centre, using Jira as their planning and tracking tool carved rock team will use both scrum and Kanban projects in Jira to track software development and business efforts. By the end of this course, you'll feel guilty about not going to the gym more often, and you'll also be able to navigate Jiro like a boss.

Understanding Jira's Major Concepts

Jira is possibly the most widely used status tracking software tool in the world, and this course is focused entirely on getting you up to speed quickly on what you need to know to use it effectively for your work on a daily basis.

 We cover
using and customizing boards,
understanding workflows,
finding and reporting on issues,
using and customizing dashboards,
using Jira with a code repository,
basic project creation.

What Is Jira?

Jira is a browser-based project status tracking tool made by Atlassian, an Australian software company.

Status tracking tools help plan and manage the status of projects. Jira is a dominant player in that market.

The low-tech competitor of status tracking software tools is really just a whiteboard with some sticky cards. These days teams and stakeholders are often distributed, so status tracking applications are a need and a big market.

A few years ago, Jira was split into three specialized but closely related subproducts, Jira Core, Jira Software, and Jira Service Desk.
Jira Core is just what it sounds like, the core parts of Jira that allow status tracking.
Both Jira Software and Jira Service Desk build on Jira Core.

If a shop only needs to plan and track non-software development projects, Jira Core can do that by itself as a standalone product.

The Jira Software product includes the features of Jira that have really driven its popularity, status tracking specifically for software development efforts, in particular, Agile software development.

Jira Service Desk is an optimized version of Jira for those organizations that only want to use Jira for customer service or help desk functions.

This course is not going to focus too much on the differences between these products as so much of what we'll cover will apply to all three of them, but it's good to be aware of which one you're using at your workplace and where it fits with respect to the others. And where there are significant differences between Jira Core and Jira Software, we'll touch on them.



The Jira installation you're using could be installed at your company either at an internal data center or private cloud, that product is called Jira Server, or it could be hosted by Atlassian on Jira Cloud, a Software as a Service offering. Currently, the two products have very similar functionality, obviously, but they appear a bit different. We'll primarily use Jira Server during this course, but we will spend some time, as needed, on Jira Cloud as well where there are significant functional differences or where navigation is different.

Understanding Key Jira Concepts

Issues
The central concept is an issue.
An issue in Jira is any item that you want to track the status of
The term issue in Jira is a general term, it doesn't mean a problem or a customer issue.

Issue Type
An issue could be a user story or a bug, a task, etc…
The categorization of an issue is specified by the issue type.
Jira comes with default issue types, administrators may add custom types.
When you create a new issue in Jira, the first thing you'll do is indicate type.

Issue Status
An issue also has a status, ready to work, in progress, done, and many more, potentially custom statuses defined on your Jira instance.

Issue Fields
Each issue has properties like description, who it's assigned to, etc…  
These properties are called fields, Jira comes with many default fields, with the ability for administrators to create custom ones of many types.

Projects
Issues created in Jira belong to a single project, if you delete a project, you are also deleting all of the issues that exist for that project.
A single Jira instance can have many projects administered by different people, or it could just be tracking a single project for a few users.

Workflows
A project also has one or more workflows.
Workflows control what statuses an issue may transition between and the rules for those transitions. For instance, a workflow might state that the statuses for a project's issues are "to do", "in progress", and "done" and that you have to transition from "to do" to "in progress", not straight from "to do" to "done". Events like emails or pop-up screens requiring additional fields may be triggered by certain transitions in a workflow. As a Jira user, you won't need to create or edit workflows necessarily, but it's useful to understand that workflows control your project's statuses and transitions between those statuses.

Boards
Boards display issues from projects and are your primary place for interacting with them.
Boards in Jira are the place you'll spend most of your time.
Usually a board will be displaying issues from a single project, but boards may display issues from multiple projects. The primary appearance of a Jira board corresponds very strongly to our whiteboard analogy. It shows lanes for the statuses and cards for each issue in the appropriate lane based on its current status. You can drag and drop to update an issue's status. So boards are where you interact with your project status. Probably the sneakiest thing to understand here is that issues do not belong to boards, projects own issues. You can delete a board, and the project and issues belonging to the project that were displayed by the board are still in Jira.


You can also have multiple boards showing issues from the same project, which I often see if different departments or teams work on the same issues at different points in time.

Dashboard
Dashboards in Jira are similar to boards in that they don't own issues, but they may display some information or graphs about issues and activity by users in Jira. Whereas boards display issue statuses and allow interaction with those issues, they're your primary workplace in Jira, dashboards are information radiators and are typically read only. A dashboard is like a console that shows you what's going on in Jira that you might be interested in from one or more of your projects. You can control what gadgets are displayed on a dashboard, and you can have your personal dashboard or share one with a team.

Filters
The last primary issue-related concept is filters. Filters are saved searches on issues. If you have a search you need to execute to display certain issues frequently, you can save it as a filter. Boards and gadgets on dashboards use filters behind the scenes as well to determine what issues they're displaying or gathering data from. You can have personal filters or share them with a team.

Understanding Grouping and Categorizing Concepts

These are ways to group issues or think about them collectively.

An epic is a large feature that will take many individual smaller features, or stories, to complete over a number of sprints or iterations.
Issues created in Jira can be assigned to a single epic, and Jira provides a number of places in the user interface where you can easily group or color issues by the epic that they're assigned to, so it's a useful grouping technique.
Epics are themselves an issue in Jira, so they may have properties such as status, creator, description, or even attachments themselves.
Epics can also have issues from multiple projects assigned to them.

Labels are descriptive tags you can assign to an issue.
Labels are a field on an issue, an issue may have many labels.
For instance, you might tag issues including log file requirements with a label of log.
You can search for issues by label, and labels used previously will autocomplete.
A label value, once created, may be used on any project in Jira.


Each project can have a number of components
Components are conceptually just some subset or part of a single project, for instance, database or user interface. A component can be set with a lead, a user responsible for that component so that issues assigned to that component will default assignment to that user.

Versions are, well, version numbers of software or product that are released.
Project administrators create version numbers for that particular project, and version numbers may be assigned to particular fields on issues in that project. A bug, for example, might have a fixed version field that would take a project version number as its value.

Summary
These grouping concepts are not either-or. They could all apply to a single issue. An issue named Allow User to Provide Healthcare Cost, for example, might be part of a deductions epic. It might belong to the tax component and be included in version one of a product and have the labels user input and financial data. How and if different projects and teams use these grouping concepts will vary.

Understanding Users, Groups, and Roles

Someone who can log into your Jira instance is, obviously, a user.
A user is assigned to one or more Jira groups. These groups are not project specific. They are high-level groups that give users global permissions in Jira, permissions that will cross projects. Groups can be customized, but Jira will come with some canned ones. Administrator, Jira administrator, and Jira software user are all examples of canned ones. We don't need to worry much about these groups in this course, but knowing that what groups you're assigned to affects your permissions is handy, and we'll see in a moment that these groups are displayed on your profile page in Jira. Last, users have roles on projects, and that will affect what permissions they have on that specific project. A user in the administrator role on a particular project has full rights to maintain that project, not the entire Jira instance, just that one project. Other roles on the project can vary by installation of Jira, so what you see on your own site may vary. You may have developers and testers and customers, or you may have some other set of project roles that have been set up. Alright, I promised we were almost done with vocabulary, and indeed we are. Go get a cookie or something. You deserve it. Then come back, and we'll learn about Carved Rock Fitness, the company we'll be starting as we learn Jira, and it's such a cool company idea I may run out and try to start it myself instead of all this boring computer stuff.

Introducing Our Carved Rock Fitness Sample Projects

We'll have two projects we are tracking in Jira for Carved Rock. The first of these is Fitness Tracker, a mobile application the company is trying to get ready before their grand opening. This app will allow their members to track their fitness progression in various ways over the course of their gym membership. The application will be integrated via Bluetooth with many of the fitness machines, tracking a member's use of that machine automatically. The second is the Grand Opening project, which is where all the tasks necessary for the gym and store to be ready to open are being planned and tracked, so we'll have one software development project and one task-oriented project. We have a few employees already hired who will be doing all of this work to get the store ready and tracking their efforts in Jira. This is Rachel. Rachel is the owner, so she will be the person primarily creating and assigning issues for both the software and non-software projects and administering the two Jira projects. And this is Anne. She's a software developer, and she will be primarily updating the status of the issues as she works on features for the Fitness Tracker application. And this is Bob. Bob is also a software developer, so we have a team of two programmers working on Fitness Tracker. Last but not least, this is Jake. He'll be a shift manager, and before the opening, he's the one doing most of the non-software development tasks needed to get the gym and store ready, so he'll be the one primarily updating the status of issues in the Grand Opening project. That's a small group of people, but we just need enough to demonstrate some of Jira's features. So that's it for Carved Rock Fitness. Maybe after the end of this course we'll not only understand Jira, but be inspired to go out and start a business. Now let's take a quick, high-level tour of Jira before we start digging in on these projects and learning features.
Demo: Finding Your Way around Jira Server

Let's take a high-level tour through our Carved Rock Jira Server installation to get a feel for where things are before we start looking at individual features. We'll take a quick look at a Jira Cloud installation in the next clip, but even if you're using Jira Cloud at your workplace, we'll spend more time describing navigation elements in this Jira Server tour, so stick around for this clip. If you want to follow along with the demos in this course, but don't have access to a Jira installation already, you can use a free trial instance of Jira, and I'd recommend using the Jira Software product since that's what both our sample projects for this course require. You can get started with a trial of Jira Software, Cloud or Server, either one, from atlassian.com. Because it does not require installation, the Cloud option's probably easier, although a Cloud free trial is currently just 7 days versus a 30-day trial if you install Jira Server on your own box. Okay, let's get on with the tour. Here we are at the login page, and we'll log in as Rachel, our store owner and also an overall Jira administrator. And where we landed after logging in is the system dashboard. Every user has a home page in a Jira instance, and there are several options as to what that can be. In Rachel's case, it's the default one, which is the system dashboard, a canned dashboard that comes with Jira that is shared to all users on the Jira instance. The system dashboard comes with a few widgets on it by default: a welcome message, an activity stream that shows actions users have taken recently in Jira, and we can see there that Rachel has been creating issues already. And we have a widget for any issues assigned to me, the current logged in user. In this case, we're Rachel, and she has no work assigned to her currently. Hmm, so she's been creating work for others already, but not assigned any to herself. These widgets can be changed, or we can even create our own personal dashboard with its own widgets and change that to our home page. We'll do that later in this course. So let's take a look at this menu bar up here at the top. This is where all the high-level navigation is located. We have a clickable logo for our installation here in the corner, and that will always take us back to our home page from wherever we are. Your installation may have customized this logo, but it will function the same. Next, we have a drop-down menu for Dashboards where we can switch or maintain dashboards. Next is the Projects menu, which provides a shortcut to the project you visited last, considered the current project, along with other recently visited projects. You can also go to the all projects view and search for a project from there. Beside that is the Issues menu, which provides access to a search screen for issues that we'll cover during this course, as well as quick links for recent issues you've accessed or created. Another useful item on this menu is filter maintenance where you can manage your saved searches. To the right of that is the Boards menu, and this menu is one Jira Cloud does not have, as we'll see in the next clip. The Boards menu gives you quick access to boards you've viewed recently, as well as access to view and search all boards in the Jira instance you have access to. Remember, boards are your primary work area on a project in Jira, as opposed to dashboards, which are information radiators, as we're seeing on this page. Next is the handy Create button on the menu bar, a quick way to create a new issue regardless of where you are in Jira, and we can see here that it defaulted the project for this issue to the current one, the Grand Opening project, and it defaulted the Issue Type to Task, which is the primary issue type that the Grand Opening project uses. We'll get around to creating issues in the next module. Let's take a look now at the Search field on the menu bar. This provides a quick search against issues and projects, and we can see it updating here as we type. There's a feedback icon here next to the Search widget, we'll skip over that, and next to that is a help menu, and this gear icon is access to the administrative functions, which you'll only have if you have administrative permissions for your Jira instance. The last item on the menu bar is a user menu, and here you can log out, change your default home screen to a particular board or the issue search screen if you don't want it to go to a dashboard, and also access your user profile page. And so let's take a look at Rachel's profile page. You can change a number of personal preferences here, and there are a couple of gadgets for your recent activity and issues assigned to you. You can also check your project roles and group assignments on this page. Let's use our home button up here and go back to the dashboard, and let's select the Grand Opening project from the Projects menu. Now we're looking at our first board, and this is where you'll be spending a lot of time with your own projects in Jira. We'll dig in deep on the functionality here in the next module, but we can already see columns according to statuses on the board along with some issues. The board sidebar can be expanded by this double chevron at the bottom, and we can see the navigation choices expanded, the board itself that we're already on, releases, reports, issues, components, and any project shortcuts that may have been defined. This gear icon is the project settings, and this is where you can modify project-specific configuration if you're an administrator for that project, as Rachel is. The Issues tab on the board provides you with a way to search through all issues that feed into the board. Alright, let's leave the Fitness Tracker board for the next module and take a look at the global issue search, and we can see issues here from both projects, Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening, and we have a number of quick options to refine the search. We'll come back to issue searching later in the course. So that should give you a good idea of how to find your way around at a high level in a Jira Server instance. Let's take a look at a Jira Cloud instance more briefly since we've already explained these elements in this clip.
Demo: Finding Your Way around Jira Cloud

We've got a good idea of where things are in a Jira Server instance in the previous clip. Now let's briefly see where those same things are in a Jira Cloud instance. If you're a Cloud user and skipped the last clip, I'd recommend backing up and watching it, as we'll have less explanation in this clip. We'll log in as Anne this time, and here we are at the system dashboard. This is a Jira Software product, just like our Jira Server instance in the last clip, so everything will mostly be the same. We just have a different layout. Right away, we see the primary navigational difference. Instead of a menu bar running across the top, we have our navigational elements to the left and a couple of sidebars. The Dashboards, Projects, Issues, and setting items are not drop-down menus. They'll take you to a landing page with more options. These four items function a bit more like tabs, and the tab we're currently on is the Dashboard. This ellipsis, or more button, in the upper right gives us similar dashboard options as were present in Jira Server on the dashboard menu drop-down. The star element on the dashboard indicates that we can favorite this dashboard. Jira Cloud uses favorites to provide quick navigation. You can favorite a number of different elements. Over on the furthest left sidebar, we have this star navigation button, and that provides quick access to boards, projects, filters, or dashboards that have either been recently viewed or favorited. So basically, some of the menu options for recently accessed items that we had spread out in Jira Server over different menu pulldowns had been collapsed into this star navigation element in Jira Cloud. The logo button in the upper left works exactly as it does in Jira Server. It takes you back to your home page. And we have our search option here with the magnifying glass button. This plus button takes the place of the Create Issue button in Jira Server. Our user profile options are down here in the lower left, along with the same help and feedback options we had in Jira Server. The grid button allows you to switch between different Cloud products or also site administration, which was the gear button in Jira Server. You can also get to site administration through the Jira settings option on the left tabs panel. Let's take a look at a project in Jira Cloud. Here we have all the projects listed, along with a nice, quick access card for Fitness Tracker since it was viewed recently. Let's verify our logo button takes us back to our home, and it does, and let's take a quick look at the issue search screen. And this has the same types of options we had in Jira Server. Let's take a look at a board in Jira Cloud. We'll navigate to the Fitness Tracker board, and we see a pretty similar layout here to Jira Server. We have the primary board with lanes, although there aren't any Fitness Tracker issues created yet to display here, and the board navigation elements to the left are also similar. In Jira Cloud, we also have a nice little drop-down here to flip over to other boards, which is handy. So that's where high-level elements can be found in Jira Cloud. The same basic stuff we had in Jira Server for the most part, but organized and laid out just a bit differently.
Module Summary

In this first module, we learned the most central Jira concepts, issues, projects, boards, dashboards, and others, and how they relate to one another. We were introduced to our sample projects for Carved Rock Fitness, which we'll be working with throughout the remainder of this course. We took a tour through the Jira Software product in both the Jira Server and Jira Cloud flavors and learned how to find our way around using key navigational elements. Now we're ready to really start exploring Jira's features as we work on projects for Carved Rock. In the next module, we'll focus on common tasks related to issues and boards.
Working with Issues and Boards
Module Overview

Now that we understand the major concepts in Jira and how to find our way around the application a bit, it's time to get stuck into the primary features that help you plan and track work in Jira. Working directly with issues and boards is where most of that happens. In this module, we'll learn about the various types of projects and boards with a primary focus on Scrum and Kanban. If you don't know what Scrum or Kanban are, fear not, we'll briefly cover that as well. We'll create and edit issues for our two Carved Rock projects, we'll plan our work in preparation for opening day, and track status as the employees get to work on those projects. We'll create and customize boards to tailor our view of that work, and we'll learn how to resolve some common problems Jira users often run into. This module should get you a long way towards being able to work with Jira on your own. Of course, I'd love for you to stick around for the rest of this course after this module, but after this one, Jira should feel pretty comfortable to you. Okay, let's find out about Scrum and Kanban, or Kanban, or Kanban, or however it's supposed to be pronounced. Onward!
Understanding Scrum and Kanban

Scrum and Kanban are two process management methodologies for software development that are very widely used. Jira's history is entangled with these two approaches, so it's a lot easier to understand how and when to use certain features in Jira if you have at least a high-level understanding of these two techniques. If you're an expert on Scrum and Kanban already, feel free to skip over this clip. The funny thing about Scrum and Kanban from a programmer's perspective is that the ideas they were born from really had nothing to do with software development. Scrum and Kanban both derive from ideas about how to improve primarily manufacturing processes, how to build cars, printers, cameras, refrigerators, assembly line type stuff. Both of them sprang chiefly from Japanese thought and companies. Kanban's origins lie with Toyota, and what Scrum was eventually derived from was a white paper, the new, new product development game that offered analysis on techniques being used for product development at mostly Japanese manufacturing companies such as Canon, Honda, and Fuji. These ideas were eventually applied by others to software development and certainly have had a big impact in that arena. But their origins aren't tied at the hip with software development at all, and that means the ideas contained in Scrum and Kanban can be applied to many types of endeavors, and Jira users have certainly been doing that over the years. Let's learn just enough about Scrum and Kanban to help us with Jira. First, just the philosophical stuff. Scrum is about self-organizing autonomous teams. To help with autonomy, these teams are cross-functional. They strive to include people with all the skills needed to get the job done to minimize reliance on external teams. Scrum recommends an incremental iterative process that stresses learning and self-transcendence, empowerment of the team to discover a solution to the problem rather than being dictated a solution from outside. The paper all this sprouts from used a soccer scrum as an analogy, where the ball is getting kicked around fluidly a lot between team members, and that's where the software methodology name ultimately came from. Management provides a Scrum team with a strategic direction, but allows the team leeway to discover the best solutions. So there's a lot of team composition and iterative learning and empowerment stuff in Scrum. Kanban's focus, on the other hand, links a little less towards people stuff and more towards efficiency. Scheduling work so that it takes place just in time, visualizing work so you can see if there are log jams, avoidance of unnecessary parts being created until requested, a focus on what it calls a card, a request for some part or other material, and thus, Kanban is a demand-driven system. Work is being pulled as needed and requested rather than pushed via a planned schedule. So you can see at a high level a potential divide here in the philosophies with Scrum and Kanban. Scrum is working towards a solution in incremental iterations, but you're still planning work for each of those iterations. Kanban is looser in terms of being plan-driven and is more of a continuous stream, work being pulled as needed just in time. Now let's take a high level look at Scrum and Kanban as software development methodologies. And this gets us closer to Jira as Jira's features were largely driven over the years by the tooling needs of these two software development approaches. For Scrum, probably the predominant aspect is that you have a sprint as an increment of time and work. A sprint is typically a pretty short duration, two weeks to a month. The team commits to a certain amount of work for that sprint, which they will deliver in some form. Basically, the sprint is a time box. You end up dividing work as you go along into these time boxes of whatever length and weeks you've chosen, and you just keep progressing from one sprint to the next. Future potential work is tracked in a product backlog in Scrum. Items in the backlog are typically ordered by how soon you'd like to implement them, and thus, items towards the top of the backlog are more eminent, and you'd like to have more detail on them than items lower in the backlog. When planning sprints, you're primarily drawing items from the backlog and assigning them to a sprint. Items in the sprint and towards the top of the backlog will often be assigned story points, which is a form of estimation. You basically assign a single number to an item to represent how difficult it will be to implement relative to other items you've implemented before. Each sprint may have a goal associated with it. This is to keep the team focused on an overall strategic goal of the sprint, not just the individual stories. Scrum teams have a few specific roles, and one of them is the product owner. This is the person with the key vision of what needs to be built, and it's likely deciding what items are in the backlog and how they should be prioritized. In our case, with Carved Rock Fitness, Rachel will be filling the product owner role for the Fitness Tracker application. Another prominent feature for Scrum teams is the daily scrum, a brief daily standup meeting, usually at the beginning of the day. The purpose of this meeting is to catch everyone up on what was accomplished yesterday and what each person's focus will be for the current day. So that's a very short summary of Scrum software development. Let's move on to Kanban as it's applied by software teams. Kanban stresses visualization of your work and process. Since Kanban is about efficiency, visualization helps see where there might be log jams, so a visual tracking board is a key element for Kanban teams. Kanban is also about a continuous flow of work as capacity allows. You pull work into the process as you have bandwidth to tackle it. So there isn't a time box here, no iterations or sprints, just a continuous flow of work. For that reason, a Kanban team may also not have story points. They are controlling their flow by how many cards are in play in certain statuses rather than estimates. A Kanban technique to allow visualization of log jams is work in progress limits. These are fixed limits on an amount of cards or issues in a particular status or stage of the process. So those are some of the key aspects of both Scrum and Kanban, and as we'll see shortly, features to support these aspects are present in Jira. Which of these features are initially available to you in Jira depend on the project template used when creating the project, which we'll discuss in the next clip.
Understanding Boards and Project Templates

What features are available to you when you navigate to your Jira board are largely dictated by what project template was used when the project was created. How Jira behaves can be customized beyond that, but what you get out of the box is based on the template you select at projection creation. Of the key Jira concepts that we discussed in the previous module, only issues and dashboards will not be created for you initially based on the project template, but everything else pretty much gets bootstrapped. You'll get a specific set of issue types, a board with particular features, certain fields available on your issues, and a particular workflow with associated statuses all based on the template chosen. So what project templates are available? Well, there are many, and they change overtime, and they aren't even all consistent between the Cloud product and the Server product. But for this course, we'll use the two most common specific ones, Scrum and Kanban, which are associated primarily with software development efforts, but can be used for other types of activities. And the rest fall under a general bucket of various business project templates. Jira considers projects created from the Scrum or Kanban templates to be software projects and projects created from any of the various business templates as business projects. But there's nothing stopping you from using Scrum or Kanban to manage your list of household chores or a business project template to track building a social media software product. It's just a matter of which template comes closest to the features you need. So what features do these templates include? The Scrum template will give you sprints. You'll have a sprint number field on your issues and features to help you assign issues to sprints and report on sprint activity. Any time you're going to have iterative time boxes for your activity, this is a good template to consider. You'll get an Active Sprint tab on your board where you can view the current sprint's work and a Product Backlog tab where you can keep future work and plan future sprints. Both the Active and Backlog tabs will allow you to specify an estimate, or story points, for each issue. You'll get issue types mostly specific to Agile software development: stories, bugs, tasks, and epics. With a project created from a Kanban template, you won't get sprints or a backlog, but you will get a Kanban board tab that is very similar to the Active Sprint tab for a Scrum board. This board has the ability to set work in progress limits on the columns. You can also now optionally add a Product Backlog tab to a Kanban board rather than have your leftmost column on the Kanban board serve as the backlog. This can be useful if you like to use your backlog as a parking lot for a lot of future potential work and you don't want it to clutter the leftmost column on your primary board. This backlog view won't have sprint-related features though since sprints don't apply to Kanban. For Kanban, you'll get the same issue types as with a Scrum template, but without the sprint number field. There are a bunch of varying business project templates. They have names like Project Management, Process Management, and Task Management. But you really just have to look at the workflow for each of those business templates to decide which one is close to what you want. In general, you'll get one primary board view for these, effectively, an active board that behaves a lot like a default Kanban board, but without work in progress limits. On Jira Server, you currently don't get a board at all for one of these projects. You'll need to create one on your own if you want one. The issue types you get to begin with for almost all of these varying business templates are Task and Sub-task. So what about our Carved Rock Fitness projects? Well, Fitness Tracker, the mobile application that they're going to build, has been initialized from a Scrum template as they'll be working in sprints and delivering their work at the end of each sprint so that staff can help test it as exercise machines arrive. The Grand Opening project, which is not a software application, was still created from the Kanban template as Rachel wants to manage that project as a continuous stream of work, but be able to see where log jams are in the flow. So that's why we need to know about both Scrum and Kanban in project templates and how they affect Jira features. The only other thing worth mentioning before we dive in is next-gen projects. At the time of this course's recording, Atlassian has released a new type of project template to the Jira Software product in the cloud. This is not available as of yet in Jira Software Server. A next-gen project allows you to have fewer choices and configuration initially for your project and add features later like sprints, work in progress limits, and story points as you need them with a simple toggle button. Our Carved Rock Fitness projects both utilize the traditional Scrum and Kanban project templates rather than a next-gen template. Okay, let's get to work in Jira.
Demo: Creating and Editing Issues

Creating and editing issues in Jira is a pretty straightforward task, but there are a few nuances, and we'll cover some of those in this demo. Let's start by creating a few additional tasks in the Grand Opening project that Rachel needs Jake to perform. We'll log in as Rachel and then navigate to the Grand Opening board, and we can use either the Projects menu or Boards menu to get to our board. Okay, remember, Grand Opening is a Kanban project, so here we are on its Kanban board. This board will be our continuous stream of work for poor Jake. There are issues already created piled up in this leftmost Backlog column. That's because a Kanban project does not have a product backlog view or tab by default. We'll change that later in this module. But for now, we'll leave this long line of stories on the left here, and Rachel will take care of deciding which ones to move into Selected for Development and in what order. So let's create some more work for Jake. We'll use the Create Issue button on the top nav bar here and create some new issues. We've got a pop-up dialog, which Jira calls a screen. This is the default format of the screen for creating and editing issues for this project, but it can be customized, and tabs to group fields can even be added to it. As soon as the exercise machines arrive, we want them installed in the gym, so let's start with Install cardio machines. The Summary field is what will show in the thumbnail view of an issue on the board, so I recommend keeping that field short and sweet. You can always put additional text in the Description field if you need to. And I meant to set that Issue Type to Task instead of Story, but that's not going to hurt anything, so we'll let it stand. We could change the priority here, but we'll be primarily using rank, the order cards appear visually on the board to handle priority. Ordering by the Priority field requires some configuration and is a little more awkward to me than drag and drop ordering, so I often just ignore the Priority field in Jira. Let's assign this to Jake, and we're ready to create the issue. If we check this Create another box before we press the Create button, the screen won't close, and key field assignments, like Jake is the assignee, will just carry over to the next issue we create, so that's a timesaver if you have a series of new issues to create. So we just have the Summary field to fill in for the next one, and we want the strength machines installed. Hit Create. And for the next couple, we'll ask Jake to test the telemetry interface for the cardio and strength exercise machines. This is the feature of the machines that will transmit member usage data like reps, resistance, speed, duration, et cetera to the mobile application we're building, allowing our customers to keep up with their exercise metrics. Once we know these machines are outputting telemetry correctly, Anne and Bob can start work on getting that data into Fitness Tracker. There we go. The new issues are created, and we can see the issue type icon for task issue types versus story issue types. I'm not going to worry about that inconsistency since both the issue types flow through the same workflow here on the board, but that icon can help you quickly identify stories from bugs, tasks, or epics on your board. Speaking of epics, let's use an epic to begin to categorize some of these tasks visually to help us plan. We're going to have several telemetry-related features over the course of building the application, so that's a good fit for an epic. Let's create an epic like we would any other issue. Change the Type to Epic, and we get this Epic Name field that we didn't have before. That's the primary title for an epic, and it will appear in some key spots in Jira, so we'll keep it very short and call it Telemetry Support. We'll also provide a slightly longer Summary field value, assign it to Jake, and create the epic. So how do we categorize some of our issues on the Kanban board by that epic? This is a little easier with a product backlog, but we don't have one here yet, so we'll have to edit the desired issues to create the link. If we click on one of these issue thumbnails, which I often just call cards, we get an expanded view of the issue as a sidebar on the right. And it doesn't matter if we click the blue issue key field on the card or just anywhere on the card. Both result in the expanded view being opened on the issue. We can scroll up and down to view the fields of the issue or use these little shortcut icons here to jump to certain groups of fields. This pane is not just read only. If we hover over a field, we'll get a pencil icon for ones we can click and edit. So let's link this issue with our new epic, and there we got a default color for the epic and a corresponding colored lozenge on the card. So this sidebar is a primary way to edit issues if you're on a board. We can also edit an issue using the same pop-up screen we used a moment ago to create issues, but the expanded issue view on the board itself is quicker and easier for editing to me. This blue issue key link on the expanded view does something a little sneaky. It takes you to the traditional view of the issue outside of the context of the board. This is a full screen view and can be handy to see a lot of information at once for the issue, and you can also edit from here. Okay, let's get back to our board. So let's close this expanded view, and that's a few issues added to our Grand Opening Kanban project, along with an epic, and we've seen how to edit an issue. Let's switch to our Fitness Tracker Scrum project now. There's no sprint underway yet, so nothing for the active view to show, but since this project was created from a Scrum template, we have a product backlog view. Let's switch to that. Here we can see a couple of issues in the backlog already, and we have a Create issue shortcut here. Let's try that. What we have up here is a quick but abbreviated form for issue entry. We have an issue type toggle, and this text entry field will map into the summary field of the new issue. That's really all we can set here, but for getting things into the backlog quickly, this is a faster option than going through the new issue pop-up dialog repeatedly. And let's just enter a series of stories here. So we have several account and login-related stories and then a few critical stories for getting telemetry data from the machines into the mobile applications, and these new ones we've just added aren't assigned to anyone yet. Just like on the Kanban board, we can click on one of these thumbnails and get the expanded view on the right. And we can edit here as well. Let's link this story with our Telemetry epic from the Grand Opening project. And that's it. Rachel has created some key early work to be done for both projects, and it's time to plan out which of these activities we want our team to get started on. We'll tackle that in the next clip.
Demo: Planning Work with a Board

In this clip, we'll plan our Carved Rock team's upcoming work. We'll perform common planning activities on a Scrum product backlog and on a Kanban board, including creating and planning sprints, categorizing by epics and assigning diversions, prioritizing and ranking issues, estimating with story points, and using components and subtasks. We have a lot to get through in this clip, so hang on to your hat, and let's get started. Here are logged in as our chief planner, Rachel. Let's do some work on our Fitness Tracker product backlog first. Nothing on the active sprint view to see yet, so let's go to the backlog, and let's create our first sprint with this handy button. Now we have this bordered area to represent our sprint on the backlog, and we can add a goal to the sprint here, and Rachel wants to focus on login and telemetry data first. We could change the name of the sprint here, but we'll leave the default. Before we start pulling in stories, we know we'll be building a native iOS client application and Android application and also a Java server-side API. There are a lot of ways we could track those different types of work in Jira, even going so far as to have separate projects for all three of those technology pieces. But what we're going to try is creating components for them because components give us a default assignee, a lead, and that will work well for our team in this case. So we'll select this puzzle piece component icon in the board navigation strip and create three components. Anne is our primary iOS developer, so she gets that component, and Bob is primary for Android, and since he knows Java the best, he's the lead for server side too. Generally, when you have work you want to track in a single project, but different parts of that project with different leads, components are worth considering. Let's navigate back to our backlog, and notice next to the board navigation strip we have these EPICS and VERSIONS tabs. Let's open up EPICS, and we get a new sidebar currently empty since the only epic we've created so far was in the Grand Opening project. But here's a shortcut to create an epic, and that gives us this nice little dedicated epic creation screen. Let's create an epic for user login and role management and also one for goal setting and tracking. Now we have these bordered areas in the EPICS sidebar for each epic, and we can use this little widget to assign a color to each epic. Let's use dark blue for login stuff, and we'll leave the dark green for fitness goals. These bullets for each epic will show the number of issues for that epic in various states of completion. The gray bar will act as a meter based on those statuses. We'll keep an eye on this as the project progresses. Let's collapse these epics and assign issues to them. I can select a card and enter the epic for the issue in the sidebar on the right. And now we have this colored lozenge on the card matching the epic. But a faster way to assign issues to epics on the backlog is just drag and drop while you have this EPICS sidebar expanded. There we go. Now if I select the epics, they also act as a filter on issues visible in the backlog. Okay, let's close these for now, and let's prioritize them. Rachel wants the member signup and login and a couple of telemetry features done early, and I'm prioritizing these using rank, their displayed order by simple dragging and dropping. There are some shortcut keys for ranking. Let's select issue FT-8 here and press the S key and then the B key. Think send bottom. And that card went to the end of the line. Let's scroll down and select it and press S and then T, send top, and it's at the head of the line. Handy if you want to push something way up or way down and you don't want to scroll. A way to find cards in a big backlog is to use these toggle filters at the top. We can narrow things down to just issues assigned to us or recent issues or type into this text filter. Any time a quick filter like this is active, you'll have a visual cue and a Clear all filters shortcut. Okay, let's do some similar prioritizing on our Kanban board for the Grand Opening project. We'll come back to Fitness Tracker in a moment. Let's get some machine installation and telemetry cards towards the top of Jake's backlog column. Rather than edit the Priority field, I'll use rank, and I'll use the S plus T shortcut to move them to the top. Okay, let's tweak the order a bit and pull them over into the Selected for Development column to let Jake know that he can get started on those. Alright, that order of tasks gets some telemetry tested quickly and should fit in well with what we have in mind for our first sprint of software work. So, back to the Fitness Tracker backlog view. So, Rachel has a planning meeting with Anne and Bob at this point, and they have some story point estimates for some of these first cards in our backlog. Let's enter those. We can't edit this little oval directly, which is where the points will display. We need to select a card and then update the Estimate field that appears. Let's close this sidebar, and now we have some ordered and estimated cards here. One way to assign them to our sprint would be to edit the issue and modify the Sprint field, but a much easier way is just drag and drop. The team thinks they can get these 13 points worth of work done. Let's assign the telemetry story FT-8 to Anne, and our team points out that they need to do this work on both Android and iOS. This is a good fit for subtasks. Let's create a subtask for each client type and assign them to the corresponding component. I'll leave the Assignee field on Automatic, and that should cause Jira to assign to the iOS lead. And we can see it did. Anne's our iOS lead, and she's listed as responsible for that subtask. Let's add another subtask for Android, and yep, this one auto-assigned to Bob. Now I'm going to speed us up to light speed as I create appropriate subtasks on these remaining two stories, including work needed on the API component, and done. Let's go ahead and create the next sprint, and we can see Jira incremented the sprint number for us automatically. We're planning on releasing to a test environment with each sprint, and we know we'll want to have an 0.1 version resulting from the first sprint and an 0.2 from the second. So let's open up the VERSIONS sidebar on the left and create those versions. We have collapsible thumbnails with a progress bar here for versions in exactly the same way that we did for epics. We can drag and drop cards in our first sprint to assign them to version 0.1, and we see a little lozenge to indicate version appear for them in the list view of the backlog. And we can see a version number field was set on the issue as well. Okay, I think our team is ready. Let's hit this big Start Sprint button, and we'll leave the default two-week duration, and Jira took us to the active sprint view. And we can see Sprint 1's work is here. We have our stories and subtasks here in the To Do column ready for Anne and Bob to work. Since they are subtasks, the stories can be collapsed to hide them if you like. But with the choice we've made to track status via subtask for this project, we'll probably leave them expanded most of the time. So our first chunk of work is planned. How does the team update status and keep track of changes as they work, you ask? Well, good timing with that question because that's the next clip.
Demo: Tracking Status with a Kanban Board

Rachel has the early work to get Carved Rock ready to open all planned out with Jira now, and work has begun. Jake, Anne, and Bob are updating Jira to show progress, and we'll spy over their shoulders to learn the basics of tracking status in Jira. In this clip, we'll update status on Jake's Kanban board, make use of the Kanban board's work in progress limits, and add some comments to an issue. First, let's drop in on Jake. Here we are logged in as him, and we'll navigate to the Kanban board for the Grand Opening project, and he has his current task to work assigned to him in the Selected for Development column. Jake has all of the exercise machines already ordered, so we just pick up that card and drop it in the In Progress column. Notice as the card is in the air between columns, Jira's highlighting valid columns that the card can be dropped in. This is based on the workflow for the project, and we'll talk about that some more in a subsequent module. But basically, if a column isn't highlighted as you're dragging a card, you can't drop it there. One of the distinctive things about a Kanban board is the ability to set work in progress limits, and those result in some visual highlighting of the columns if you have too little work in a particular column or too much based on those limits. To set those, we need to go into board configuration from this menu here. Now we'll cover board configuration and customization in detail later in this module, but we're going to sneak WIP limits into this clip. We just go to the Columns tab here, and we see the column configuration for the board. Each column has a min and a max field that's currently empty. To define WIP limits for Jake's work on the Kanban board, all we need to do is set some of these numbers. Let's make sure Jake has at least a couple of things in progress at all times by setting a minimum here to two, but no more than five going on at the same time. We don't want Jake to have a nervous breakdown. Now let's go back to our board and see what those limits do. Jake currently is slacking and doesn't have enough in progress, so we have a visual cue on the board; the column is yellow. We can see the specific limits up here at the top of the column. If Jake gets overexcited and pulls too much stuff into this column, we get a red visual indicator. Jira doesn't strictly enforce these limits by refusing to let you drop cards, it just gives you a visual warning. Let's move some of those cards back now. Okay, the machines arrive, so we mark this card as done. Notice the strikethrough on the issue ID. That's another visual indicator of a card in some stage of the workflow where it's considered complete. And let's move these cardio machine-related cards to In Progress. The cardio telemetry tests that Jake runs look good, so we can mark this one done as well. Another way to do that besides drag and drop is to click on the issue to get to the sidebar and use this more actions in the pull-down menu. We can see all the status transition targets here, and we can mark it as Done. Generally, I just use drag and drop for status changes, but the more actions operation is good to know where to find. Let's say we want to add some text tool information along with a status change. We can add a comment here in the sidebar, and we can even mention specific Jira users if we want to give them an alert that we made the comment. In general, I can't recommend using Jira comments in place of direct communication or a persistent chat tool like Slack, but if you have comments that are important to capture for future reference, adding them with the issue in Jira is very useful. Okay, Jake gets to work on the strength machines now, and let's assign this issue to the Telemetry epic as well. And now I'll leave Jake to do some more work and go see what the software developers are up to.
Demo: Tracking Status on a Scrum Board

We've learned how to update project status on a Kanban board. Now we'll tackle our first sprint using a Scrum board. We'll advance status of the sprint and change its scope, the work included in the middle of the sprint. We'll update status using subtasks, use board quick filters, close our first sprint, and release version 0.1 of the Fitness Tracker application. So now we're logged in as Bob, our Android and Java expert on the active sprint view of the Fitness Tracker board, and all of the subtasks on these stories in the To Do column are visible. One thing Bob can do is use the My Issues quick filter here at the top, and that hides Anne's tasks and let's him focus on his. Because these stories have subtasks, the stories themselves are just represented as strips that stretch along all the columns, and the overall story status is shown as text. You can't drag the stories themselves, but you can still select them and open the issue sidebar for them. Basically, when an issue has subtasks on a board, it's the subtask you're going to have to drag. Bob has gotten cardio telemetry displaying in the Android version of the app with fake data instead of real data from a machine. So we'll mark this subtask as In Progress and then Done, and notice the story status that the task is nested under never changed. Jira support for automatically updating issue status based on subtask status is limited. When all the subtasks are done, it'll give us an option to mark the parent issue done as well, but that's about the extent of it. We could update the story status manually, but I don't find that necessary with most teams. If you're using subtasks, normally you'll have them visible on the board, and you can see what's going on just from where the subtasks are rather than worrying about the parent story status. Bob has learned from Jake that the cardio machine telemetry feature is ready for real and asks Rachel if he can go ahead and add one of the stories from the backlog into the sprint, the ability for the mobile device to connect to an exercise machine via Bluetooth and get real data from it. Rachel agrees that at this point that's now a higher priority than member login, so let's switch to the backlog view and add that story into our sprint. Jira warns us that we're adding scope to our sprint, but that's okay. Let's assign this new card to version 0.1 and to the Telemetry epic. Now really, this story should also have two subtasks. The Bluetooth connection functionality will need to work for both Android and iOS. But I want to show a mixed active board where some stories have subtasks and some don't, so we're going to skip that. We can see that these status counters up here at the top show 16 points now in the sprint. Okay, back to the active board. Turn off the My Issues filter, and we can see the new story here at the bottom, and the story point estimate is on the thumbnail also. Unfortunately, you lose the story point display with stories that have subtasks and also the epic lozenges. So Bob makes progress on the device connection story, and also we need to assign it to him, and he gets his other work done during the sprint except for the Android login. If we return to the backlog, we can see the sprint progress counters updating according to the status of issues in the sprint, and the version progress bar for version 0.1 has also moved based on the three-point story that was completed. Now let's see how Anne has done during this sprint. Here we are logged in as Anne on the active board, and she completes her iOS telemetry display work, and Jira offers to update the overall story status to Done since all the subtasks for that story are now done. We'll let it do that, and she finished her member signup work as well, but doesn't get to login either. If we flip back to the backlog, we can see all of these progress indicators have updated. So that's the state of our first sprint. Now here we are logged in as Rachel on the active board, and as the project lead, she'll take care of completing the sprint. This link up here accomplishes that, and Jira detects that one of the issues assigned to the sprint was not complete and asks what we want to do with it. We'll assign it to the next sprint rather than return it to the backlog since we already have Sprint 2 created. That gives us a Sprint Report, which includes a burndown graph, how issues in the sprint were completed over time, along with a simple list of issues completed and not completed. Okay, let's return to the backlog, and Sprint 2 is at the top of our board now, and the issue we asked Jira to carry over from Sprint 1 has been included inside it. Let's go ahead and update that one to be in version 0.2. And the team releases the 0.1 version of the software, so we want to reflect that fact in Jira. Rather than open the VERSIONS sidebar, which is for planning, we want to go to the Releases tab on the board, this little boat icon. Ship it, get it? The 0.1 progress bar is all green, so all issues that were assigned to it are complete, and we can use this drop menu to mark it as a released version. If we were integrated with a build system, like Atlassian's Bamboo, we could trigger the release from here. But we'll just administratively mark the version as released, and we can specify a release date if we wanted. Okay, that was a full sprint completed and tracked in Jira. Let's learn a bit more about how to customize the boards in the next clip.
Demo: Creating and Customizing Boards

Jira has a lot of customizations that are possible for boards, and you can also create extra boards for projects or even multi-project boards for specific purposes. In this clip, we'll build a new multi-project board, apply horizontal swimlanes to a board, change how issues display, create a custom quick filter, modify a board's filter, and add a backlog view to a Kanban board. Let's get to customizing. Here we are logged in as Rachel, and the Fitness Tracker team has Sprint 2 underway. Rachel has Sprint 3 planned as well, and we have some new stories in the backlog related to goal setting and tracking for members. Rachel would like to be able to see the overall status for both the Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening projects on one board. Let's go to the View all boards page, and here we have an option to create a board. Let's select that. And since we already planned sprints in the Fitness Tracker board, we don't need the sprint feature on our new board, so let's choose Kanban. We want to create a board from two existing projects, so we'll select that option, name the board Overall, select our two projects, and Create. There we go. That was easy, a new board. Let's close these dialogs advertising product backlogs for Kanban, and we can see issues displayed here from both Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening, and it does give us an overall sense of where things are right out of the box. We're at a pretty low screen resolution for this course. At a typical resolution, you'd be able to see quite a few more cards on the screen. To customize a board, go to the Board pull-down menu and select Configure. Assuming you have permissions to configure the board, there are a lot of options here grouped into categories by these tabs to the left. The General tab has the board name, administrators for the board, settings for the filter that feeds issues into the board, how issues are ordered, what projects feed issues into the board, and for our Kanban board, we have these last two settings, sub-filter and issue hiding. Those help keep the right-hand side of a Kanban board from piling up too many old or released issues. The Columns tab controls overall vertical layout based on the workflow for the project. The column names are listed along with WIP limits if it's a Kanban board and the statuses from the workflows of the projects feeding into the board. In this case, we have two projects that feed the board, and we can see the BACKLOG and SELECTED FOR DEVELOPMENT statuses from the Grand Opening project along with the TO DO status from the Fitness Tracker project mapped to the leftmost column. The IN PROGRESS and DONE statuses are used by both projects. There's also a wizard to the left to enable a backlog view for a Kanban board, and we're going to do that in a moment, but for the Grand Opening project, not this new overall board. If you had any workflow statuses not mapped to a column, they would appear on the far right, and any issues in those statuses won't display on the board. Column constraints are the WIP limits, which we've seen previously, and we'll turn them off for this new board. Next is Swimlanes. These allow you to create horizontal lanes on the board. We'll come back to this tab in a moment. Next is Quick Filters, the little buttons at the top of a board that let you display only certain issues. You always have the My Issues and Recently Updated filters, but you can add custom ones here. Next is Card colors, and this isn't too exciting. You can add a colored strip to the left-hand side of cards shown on the board based on issue type or other criteria. Card layout is a little more useful. This controls what fields display on the card's thumbnail image on the board. You can add up to three additional fields besides those displayed by default. Next are some options that let you set working days for your team, which primarily just affects reporting, and last is the Issue Detail View, which is what I've been calling the expanded view of an issue that you get on the right-hand side when you select an issue on the board. This screen lets you control what fields are displayed in that view and in what order. Okay, those are our options. Let's make a couple of changes here for Rachel. Let's add some swimlanes based on epics, and just in case task names don't make it clear, let's make sure the component for issues is displayed on the cards as well. And let's navigate back to the board, and there we are. We can see the epics running along as a horizontal strip, and the component field is displaying on each card. We can collapse and expand the swimlanes if we want as well. Okay, let's add a custom quick filter to this board now. We'll jump back into configuration, and let's add a quick filter that will cause only issues assigned to the iOS client component to display. Back to the board, and let's try that out, and it works. Okay, let's cut over to the Grand Opening Kanban board now, and we can see Jake has been busy. All the machines are installed, and he's working on climbing walls and other exercise equipment now. Rachel would like to prevent this backlog column from growing too large. A lot of scrolling is needed, and you can't use drag and drop to assign cards to epics from here. A product backlog, like the Fitness Tracker project has, would be nice, so let's add one. We go into board configuration again, and we just drag the BACKLOG status out of the Backlog column and onto this little feature wizard here. And there we go. Now the leftmost column of the active board is just the stuff that's selected for development that Rachel wants Jake to work on next. And if we go to the new backlog view, it's pretty much like the Fitness Tracker one, except we can't create sprints here. We can, however, drag cards from the Backlog into Selected for Development from here, and we can also expand the EPICS and VERSIONS sidebars like we were able to in a Scrum backlog, and that can help us organize work for a Kanban project. Okay, now we're on the Fitness Tracker board, and Rachel would really like to be able to see the Telemetry epic from the Grand Opening project display here the same way that epics for the Fitness Tracker project do. So let's go to board configuration, the General tab, and let's edit the filter that feeds issues into this board. Remember from the previous module that filters are saved issues searches. Each board has a single filter it uses to feed issues into it. We'll cover issue searching and filters a bit more in a later module, but for now, we'll just go to this Advanced tab, and I'll modify the current query that selects all issues in the Fitness Tracker project to also include only epic type issues from the Grand Opening project. And I can see that did add the Telemetry epic when I test the query. So let's save the changes to the filter, go back to our board, open the epics on the backlog view, and there's the Telemetry epic we've been missing. Now we can assign Fitness Tracker cards in the backlog to this Grand Opening Telemetry epic by drag and drop. Now that we've learned a lot about planning and tracking with boards, as well as customizing them, let's wrap this module up with a few common problems you may run into.
Demo: Troubleshooting Common Board-related Problems

Jira is not difficult to use, but as we touched on previously, boards, workflows, and projects are all highly customizable, and that leads to a little complexity. And complexity can lead to some fun little mysteries. In this clip, we'll examine likely culprits of a few common whodunits you may encounter while using Jira, including the case of the missing field, the case of the missing issue, the case of the unmovable issue, and the case of the zombie issue that just won't get off your backlog even though the issue is completed. Here we are logged in as Rachel, and let's open a Fitness Tracker issue from the dashboard. This takes us to the traditional view of an issue in Jira, one that isn't specific to any board. Now this card has story points assigned to it, but we can't see them here. We were able to see story points on the backlog for Fitness Tracker during planning, but it's missing from this view. If you're a Jira administrator, you have an option here, Where is my field? I wish this was available to all users, but even if you aren't an admin, it's something you can point your admin to when similar situations occur. We just type in the name of the field we're looking for, and it tells us that the field is missing on the Default Issue Screen for the project, and there's a link to the configuration for that screen. Let's close this for now and edit the issue. This brings up the Edit pop-up screen for the screen, and the field is missing from here as well. There's an identical link here if you're an administrator, and now let's follow through on this and add the field. We need administrative access to fix this, so we'll confirm our login, and now we're on the Default Issue Screen configuration. We can scroll down and enter the field name and add it. And let's drag it up a bit in the field order. Okay, now let's go back to the same issue again, and there's the field on the traditional view. And if we edit the issue, there it is on the Edit pop-up screen as well. There's also a permission helper available to Jira admins. If you don't seem to have certain permissions as a Jira user, for example, it won't let you edit issues or change their statuses on a board, this tool is worth asking your admin to try as well. Another common problem is an issue that just doesn't seem to appear on a board. Let's hop over to the new Overall board, and we'll create some mayhem here on purpose. If we scroll down a bit, we can see issue GO-3, order initial store stock. And we can click on that and see in the detail view that its current status is SELECTED FOR DEVELOPMENT. Let's go to the board configuration and then the General tab. If an issue isn't showing up on your board, two common causes are that the filter for the board isn't including the issue or that the card is in a status that isn't mapped properly to your board. The filter is listed on the General tab, and you can click on it as if you were going to edit it and then simply just execute it. Then you can see if the issue is returned from the query in the search results and even tweak the query to see what might be wrong. If you have permissions, you can save a fix to that filter and get the issue on your board that way. Now back to the Columns tab, and let's replicate the second common cause of a missing issue, an unmapped status. We can see from this board's configuration that the SELECTED FOR DEVELOPMENT status is mapped to the To Do column of the board. If we drag that status out to the Unmapped Statuses section on the far right and go back to the board, and we see now that Grand Opening 3 is missing. So always check for unmapped statuses on your board. Another thing to cover while we're here is an issue that you can't drag to a particular column. As we mentioned before, the workflow for your project determines what the valid destination statuses are from any given status that an issue is currently in. If the only statuses an issue can transition to are unmapped on the board, you won't be able to drag it anywhere. We'll talk more about workflows in the next module. Okay, here we are now on the Grand Opening board, and we'll cover the last of our mysteries for this clip, which is an issue that was completed but still showing up in your backlog like an unwanted dinner guest. I can't replicate this particular problem without creating a purposefully broken custom workflow, which is a bit beyond the scope of this course, but we'll take a look at a couple of things that can affect this as it will help overall understanding of how issues flow on a board. Let's go to the Columns configuration for this board. The first thing to note is the far-right column. Issues on the far-right column won't show up in your backlog. Okay, cool, so what? Well, notice that each of these three statuses have a suddenly different color appearance, light gray, yellow, and green. Statuses in Jira can be grouped into roughly three general categories: To Do, In Progress, or Complete. Your Jira instance will come with a number of canned statuses, and there will be multiple of them in each of those general categories. For example, from the gray appearance, we can see that BACKLOG and SELECTED FOR DEVELOPMENT are both To Do type of statuses. If we had two complete type statuses on this board, let's say in addition to DONE we had REJECTED, and only DONE was mapped to the far-right column, only done issues would be screened from the backlog. Rejected issues would still show up. So multiple completed types of statuses on a board can cause you some issues with your backlog that you may need to fiddle with to get the desired behavior. The second thing to note is this Set resolution checkbox. Jira has a sneaky somewhat hidden field called Resolution. When an issue is in a complete category of status, the greenish-looking ones, it's expected that the Resolution field is set to some non-empty string. A canned Jira project, like we have here, is going to take care of that properly for you behind the scenes. A custom workflow might have some mistakes in it where resolution isn't properly set, and that can cause problems. Let's take a look at the active Kanban board here, and notice the strikethrough on the issue IDs that are in the Done column. The strikethrough is present because the issue has the Resolution field set to a non-empty string. If you open an issue in the traditional view by clicking its link, the Resolution field value is listed. You really don't want to add this field to an Edit screen for your issues. That's a recipe for trouble. You want your workflow to set it properly as changes to statuses are made behind the scenes. But here's where you can find the field value if you think it might be causing you problems. Okay, so those are a few of the problems you may run into and likely causes. Hopefully you won't have any of these.
Module Summary

Well, that was a lot of status tracking. In this module, we created issues for the Grand Opening and Fitness Tracker projects, and we used boards to plan and track Jake's work with the Grand Opening project, as well as plan and track sprints for the Fitness Tracker project. We planned and released our first version of the Fitness Tracker application. We added a product backlog to the Kanban board of the Grand Opening project to allow us to plan using epics more easily and keep the left-hand column of the active part of the board from growing too lengthy. We customized both boards in a number of ways to track work more easily, including swimlanes, what fields display on cards, and what issues are included in the filter for a board. We created a new multi-project board from scratch to help Rachel see progress in both projects in one place. We used epics, components, versions, and subtasks to help us plan and track work. And we learned how to troubleshoot some common problems. For daily Jira usage, a big chunk of what you need to know was in this module. You should feel pretty comfortable in a Jira instance now. In subsequent modules, we're going to round things out a bit more and also see our Carved Rock team through to their opening. In the next module, we'll get into a bit more detail on project workflows.
Understanding and Maintaining Workflows
Module Overview

We've been focused on things that are very visible in Jira so far, issues and boards, but the behind-the-scenes engine of a project in Jira is its workflow. The workflow controls the overall lifecycles of issues in your project and what happens when an issue transitions from one status to another. In this module, we'll learn about workflow-related concepts in Jira in a bit more detail. We'll learn where to locate and view the workflow for your project, we'll learn about simplified versus standard Jira workflows, and we'll make a common modification to the Fitness Tracker project's simplified workflow. We aren't going to learn how to build and maintain a Jira workflow from scratch in this module. That's a more advanced topic and one that the Jira Fundamentals course here at Pluralsight goes into bit more detail on, but we will learn enough to understand why tapping in Jira as status changes occur in a project and what some of the possibilities are. So, let's get with the flow.
Understanding Workflow Concepts

In the first module, we touched on workflows as a high-level concept in Jira, the fact that each project in Jira usually has a single workflow and that the workflow control status changes of issues. Let's drill in a bit more. We've seen statuses in Jira already, like To Do, In Progress, and Done in the Fitness Tracker project. Statuses like these in Jira are global. Many projects may share the same statuses. What makes a status and the rules and behavior around status changes specific to a project is a workflow. Each project typically has a single workflow for all of its issue types, but it is possible for a project to have different workflows for different types of issues. A workflow has a number of steps. Each step in the workflow is associated with a single global status referred to as the linked status for that step. Each step in a workflow has a name, and usually it's given the same name as the status it's associated with to avoid confusion when maintaining the workflow. As users of Jira, we don't see the step names, we see the status names, but the steps are still there behind the scenes. Each step may have a number of transitions out of that step to some other destination step in the workflow. The transition allows an issue to change from the status of the source step to the status of the destination step. Transitions are unidirectional, so if you need to allow an issue to go back and forth between two statuses, a transition in each step is needed. Transitions have names too, and those names appear in Jira as buttons or menu items on the issue when changing that issue's status through any other means than drag and drop. When you're changing an issue status by drag and drop on a board, you're still triggering a transition. It's just happening behind the scenes. Transitions are the hook point for a lot of customization. A transition can have triggers. These are external events that can cause an issue to change status from the source status of the transition to the destination status. Maybe if a developer commits some code with that issue as its tag, the issue transitions automatically to in progress if it wasn't already marked as in progress. A transition can have conditions. These are rules that specify whether that transition should even appear as an option to a user. Maybe you only want to allow an issue to be marked in progress if certain fields are filled in, or maybe only a particular user or team member role can trigger a transition. There's an example of a condition being set on a transition in the Jira Fundamentals course. A transition may have a screen associated with it that pops up when the transition's triggered to collect additional information from the user. A transition may have validators. These are rules that check that the transition is allowed. These differ from conditions in that if a condition is not met, the user can't see or trigger the transition at all, whereas validators fire as the transition's triggered by the user. Post functions are probably the most important property of transitions. They're called immediately after a transition completes. Maybe adding a comment automatically to an issue, firing an event of some kind, or invoking a web hook are all possible post functions. If you get an email from Jira after an issue changed to some particular status, that was ultimately caused by a post function on a transition. So let's look at a sample workflow similar to what we have in Fitness Tracker, but with specific transitions between statuses rather than allowing just any status change. We have a To Do step, an In Progress step, and a Done step with each of the steps linked to the global status of the same name. We might have a transition going from To Do to In Progress named Start Work, a transition from In Progress back to To Do, a transition from In Progress to Done, and a transition from Done back to In Progress. With such a workflow, you would not be able to drag a card on your board from the Done lane straight to the To Do lane like we can with Fitness Tracker since there's no transition that follows that path in this workflow. There's one transition that every workflow has, which is the create issue transition. That's the entry point into the workflow, and it always connects to the first step in the workflow. Create issue transitions can also be customized. The workflows we just described are standard Jira workflows. Jira also has simplified workflows, and both Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening use simplified workflows. Jira creates simplified workflows automatically for you when you create a new project from a template. They're basically starter workflows. Standard workflows with steps and transitions, as we just covered, are created manually by Jira administrators using a workflow editor. A simplified workflow allows you to change between all statuses in the workflow freely with no restrictions. A standard workflow restricts status changes based on the defined transitions. Simplified workflows allow no customization in terms of screens, post functions, validators, et cetera, whereas standard ones allow all of the customizations we just discussed. One interesting aspect here is that you can in fact edit a simplified workflow and add features to it like additional post functions or transition rules, but once you do that, Jira no longer treats it as a simplified workflow. It's just a standard Jira workflow at that point, really. Simplified workflows take care of the Resolution field for you, whereas standard ones require you to set the resolution yourself at correct points in the workflow. Simplified workflows can, in limited ways, be updated from the board Columns configuration tab, something you can't do with a standard Jira workflow, which must be modified in a workflow editor. Okay, that's it for workflow concepts. Let's take a look at the simplified workflows for Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening.
Demo: Viewing a Project's Workflow

So where do you find the workflow for your project in Jira? Well, there are several places to look, as we'll see in this clip. We're logged in as Rachel, and let's go to the Grand Opening projects board. And Jake has gotten a lot of work done. He's primarily just hiring staff now. All the machines and equipment are installed. So we can see the columns of this board clearly, and that's a visual representation of workflow certainly, but it isn't the workflow. Let's go into board configuration and the Columns tab. If your project is on a simplified workflow, as the Grand Opening project is, it tells you clearly here. If you're on a custom workflow, but qualify to switch to a simplified workflow, there will be a button here to allow you to make that switch. When on a simplified workflow, this screen, board columns configuration, can be used to modify your workflow in terms of adding and removing statuses. We'll make such a change in the next clip. You can't see or modify transitions here, but that's okay because a simplified workflow, as we just learned, allows transitions from all statuses to any other status. For a standard workflow, you need to use a workflow editor, which we'll see in a moment, to modify your workflow. Let's go back to the board and navigate to Project settings. This section on workflows will list all the workflows for your project. And again, most projects will have just a single workflow. If you have multiple workflows for your project based on issue types, it's the workflow scheme that will show that. But here, we can see all the issue types in the project are on a single software simplified workflow. We can select the workflow here and get a visual representation of it called the workflow designer. In this view, the steps are represented as rectangles, and again, their names are usually the same as their linked status names, and the lines are transitions. For simplified workflows, this view is not too complex. We know that you can always change from any status to any other status in a simplified workflow, and that's what this All arrow indicates. The gray circle and the line to the BACKLOG step represents the create issue transition. We could edit the workflow here, if permission is allowed, to the point where we're really just using a standard Jira workflow that started out as a simplified one. Basics of using the workflow editor are covered in the Jira Fundamentals course. There is a text representation of the workflow here as well, but for simplified workflows, this really just amounts to a list of the steps. Let's leave the Grand Opening project for now and take a look at Fitness Tracker's board configuration because something unexpected happened here. Fitness Tracker was created from the Scrum project template with a simplified workflow, but when we changed the filter for the board in the previous module to include ethics from the Grand Opening project, Jira stopped considering it to be a simplified workflow. As it turns out, only a board with issues coming from a single project can work with a simplified workflow. Nothing broke. The workflows still function correctly, but Jira stopped considering it as a simplified workflow. Notice the Add status button is missing here now because of that. If you're a Jira administrator, all workflows are also accessible in the administrative part of the application. We select Issues administration and then the Workflow tab, and they're listed here. Okay, so we have three places to view and modify workflows, the board columns configuration for simplified workflows, project settings, and then the administrative menu. Now let's make a change to the Fitness Tracker workflow.
Demo: Adding a New Status to a Simplified Workflow

Creating and modifying standard Jira workflows is out of the scope of this course, but modifying a simplified workflow to add a new status is easy to do and a common need, so we'll cover it in this clip. Here we are logged in as Rachel at the Fitness Tracker active sprint board. Much of Sprint 2 is done, but there are two login tasks still in progress. Previously, Anne and Bob have just been updating issues to done when they think they're finished with the issue. Rachel would like to formally validate their work before it's marked as done in the sprint. The easy thing to do here would simply be to add a new status and column on the board between In Progress and Done, and simplified workflows allow just such a change without the need to build a custom Jira workflow for the project. For simplified workflows, as we've covered, an easy place to modify them is in the board configuration column settings, so let's go there. For this clip, I've modified the filter for the board to remove the inclusion of Grand Opening epics so that Jira will consider it a simplified workflow again. I'll annoy Jira and change it back after we're done here. Rather than add a status to an existing column, we really want both a new column and a new status, so we'll use the Add column button. We'll call our new column Validating and the general status category for validating is In Progress. And Jira created the column and also a status of the same name for us. So let's go back to our board, and there's the column. Let's say Anne and Bob think they're done with their respective member login work, so Rachel will drag them to Validating, and when she's tested them, drag them to Done. Notice as they're being dragged to Done that the To Do and In Progress columns are also valid drop targets. That's because this is a simplified workflow, so an issue in our new status of validating can be moved to any other status in the workflow. That's the last bit of work for Sprint 2, so Rachel will go ahead and mark this sprint as completed. So simplified workflows are pretty easy to modify, and even if you need some of the complex features that we talked about previously, conditions or special post functions, you can always transition to a standard Jira workflow later.
Module Summary

In this module, we learned some of the features that standard Jira workflows can provide to your project in Jira. Conditions and post functions on transitions are probably the features you'll be most likely to use in your own projects. We learned about simplified workflows, which is what is the Grand Opening project uses and what the Fitness Tracker project used before we modified its filter to include epics from the Grand Opening project. We looked at three places where you can view and modify a workflow, board columns configuration for simplified workflows and project settings and the administrative part of the application for all workflows. Finally, we made a simple change to the Grand Opening project to add a new status to its simplified workflow from the board columns configuration. Now let's learn about searching for issues, saving and sharing filters, and reporting.
Finding and Reporting on Issues
Module Overview

But what if we need to find issues that aren't shown on boards anymore or scattered across too many boards? What kind of reports are available to show progress independent of boards? Jira provides a number of features to search for and report on issues. In this module, we'll search for issues using both the basic and advanced search features provided by Jira. We'll customize search results and export them to a spreadsheet. We'll save a search as a filter and set permissions for that filter so others can run the same search. We'll use the bulk edit functionality on search results, and we'll take a tour of a few canned Jira reports provided to projects. So while Jake's trying to explain to Rachel why he's spending so much time testing the climbing walls, let's see if we can find a few issues.
Searching for Issues

In this clip, we'll take a look at Jira's core search features, basic search, customizing the display of search results, advanced search, which consists of a complete query language, exporting results to a file, and the handy Jira quick search feature. We're logged in as Rachel on the Fitness Tracker board, and Sprint 3 is underway, so the first couple sprints' work aren't visible here anymore. On the Grand Opening board, Jake has some new tasks, and some of his previously completed work has fallen off the right-hand side of the board due to age. Rachel would like some information from issues that aren't all on boards now. Issue search in Jira can do that, so let's go to the main search screen using top navigation. By default, this screen is showing all issues in the Jira instance, which is 48 at the moment. If you have a lot of issues, you'll only see the first 50 or so and can page. We have some easy canned searches on the left here, done issues, for example. Jira has two forms of search, basic and advanced. Basic search is performed by selecting from a series of drop lists, along with this text search field. Advanced search is a full query language called Jira Query Language that you enter into this field. But let's flip back and try some basic searches. We just set a drop-list value to match what we'd like to see. For instance, we can choose to see only Fitness Tracker issues using the project drop list, multiple projects, or only Grand Opening issues. With any search, the results could be shown in a split list and detail view like this where the currently selected result in the list has an expanded view on the right, or entirely in a list view by changing this toggle here, which lets you see many fields at once as columns for all the issues in the results. Basic search can also filter by issue type, so just epics, for example, by status, so here are just the in progress issues, and by assignee, so just Jake's issues maybe. All of these filters combine, so we could select just issues in the Grand Opening project that are in progress, for example. We can also use this Contains field to match issues that have certain words in them, like login. With this field, you need to hit the carriage return to apply the filter. The Contains field will search against all fields in a Jira issue to see if they contain the words entered. If there's a field you'd like to add to the basic search, select this More drop-down, and look for the field you'd like to filter by. In this case, let's try version, and it'll appear as a drop list, and we can use it just like these other filters. So here we have just the issues included in version 0.1 of fitness tracker. We can then remove the version selector when we no longer need it. Regardless of whether you just performed a basic or advanced search, there are some changes you can make to the result list. You can order them by a particular field, ascending or descending, and you can add or remove columns as well. Let's add a column for Project, and the Development column isn't one where we're putting data into for our card drop projects, so let's remove that one. We can also change the order of the columns by dragging them. Okay, let's try an advanced search now. You can just start typing a field name you'd like to search by, like project, and autocomplete will help you. Then choose an operator like equal. Then we can provide a value to match against. And we get autocomplete help with all of this, and there's our first query. Just hit Return to get the results. Let's try another search by project, but this time we'll use the in operator. This'll retrieve issues from both projects for Rachel, which is the same as all issues in this Jira instance in our case, but if there are other projects here we didn't want to include or others are added later, this clause would be useful. We can add additional criteria to this search using a logical operator like and or or. In this case, let's further refine our search to just display issues that haven't been resolved yet, where the Resolution field is empty. Remember, any status that's considered to be done will have a non-empty resolution field. So let's hit Enter, and that looks like it worked based on the statuses here. And finally, we can add an ORDER BY clause to the query to control how the results are ordered. We can toggle a column name in the results like we did a moment ago, but this time we can see that it's adding an ORDER BY clause to our advanced search, which we could also have just typed. We can have multiple ORDER BYs, so in this case we're in descending order by status, but within a given status, ascending order by creation date. Let's go back to just a status order. This query language is called JQL, Jira Query Language, and it can do a lot more than we've seen here. There's more coverage of JQL in the Jira Fundamentals course here at Pluralsight. Now that we have this data on currently opened issues from both projects, Rachel would like this information in a spreadsheet. This button up here lets us select an export type, and we have many possible targets, including an Excel file format. Current fields would mean fields currently displayed on the search in the results, and All fields would be the full set of all fields defined for these issues. We definitely don't need all of that, so we'll select Current fields, and let's open our spreadsheet, and this is a match for our search results. The next search feature we'll cover is a pretty sneaky one. We're logged in as Jake for this part. This quick search box that's in the main menu navigation bar provides a handy way to access individual issues as we type if we selected them in the autocomplete drop list, but it will also just execute a standard Jira search and take us to the search results screen if we hit Return. And we can see this resulted in a contain search for the target word. This is a quick way to hunt for issues that contain certain words from any place in Jira since the quick search field is always displayed. But it also has power user stealth features. Well okay, Jira calls them smart searches, but I like power user stealth search way better. These are basically keywords and special characters that quick search field recognizes. For instance, I can type my, hit Return, and get results of all issues currently assigned to me. And we're Jake right now, so that matched Jake's issues. Smart search does have an annoyance in that you keep getting this pop-up message letting you know that it's not performing a contain search because it saw a keyword. And you just have to keep closing it. I couldn't find a way to turn that thing off permanently. It's a smart search accompanied by a dumb popup. We can also type something like my tasks to just look for issues of a certain type assigned to us, and that worked, or even a special character of C to look for a component, so we just found issues associated with the iOS component. There are lots of tricks smart search can do described in Jira's documentation. Just look up Jira smart quick search for a list of them. Maybe they'll start calling them power user stealth searches if enough of us ask them to. So that's a variety of ways to search for issues in Jira. But what if you'd like to repeat a particular search or share it with others? Well, let's you and I leave Jake in peace here and slide on over to the next clip.
Saving and Sharing Filters

If you need to repeat a search or share it with others, you can save your search as a filter and even allow others to edit the filter if you want. In Carved Rock's case, Rachel would like to create and share a filter that shows issues from both projects ordered by the epic each issue is associated with. So we're logged in as Rachel, and we'll go to the issue search screen, and we'll use an advanced search for this. First, let's target both projects with a project in expression. Okay, there we go. So we aren't done yet, but let's go ahead and save this query as a filter. We can use this Save as button here for that and give the filter a name. We'll call it Carved Rock All Issues. And now Jira indicates that we're working with a saved filter by this title here and a Details link that we'll use in a moment. Jira also made this new filter one of our favorites by default, indicated by the star here and the fact that it now appears in our filters side bar under FAVORITE, and it's also available in the Issues pull-down menu now as a recently accessed filter. We can execute a different search by clicking on some other filter and then return just as easily back to our new saved one. Now let's refine our filter a little more. There are subtasks included here, and we really just need the parent stories for those. Also, we want the epic each issue is assigned to to be a column on the report, but we don't want epic issues themselves to appear as rows, so let's use the not in expression to screen subtasks and epic issues out of the result. And there we go. Now it looks like we just have stories and tasks in the results. Now notice that we have an EDITED indicator and a Save button. That lets us know that we've modified but not yet saved a named filter. Let's go ahead and save it with our updated query. And now let's consider the columns for the results. Now that we're working with a filter rather than an ad hoc search, the window to add or remove columns now has an enabled Filter tab. The filter column selections will apply just to that filter and not every ad hoc search you perform, which is what the My Defaults tab of field selections applies to. So let's remove the Updated time column and add the Epic Link column just for this filter. Epic Name is a field specific to epic issue types, whereas Epic Link is the field that links some other issue type to an epic, and that's what we want for this filter. And let's add the project name as a column as well. That's all our stories and tasks in the two projects with their epic listed, and we've even got the color associated with the epic. Now let's order these issues by their epic link, and that looks great. Okay, I think we're done. Let's save this filter. Now we'd like to share this filter with the rest of the Carved Rock team. Let's click on this Details link here, and that gives us an option to edit permissions for the filter and even have emails sent with the filter results to others on a scheduled basis. Let's go into the permissions, and we'll allow any logged in user to run our filter. And add that permission, and then save. Permissions and subscriptions for all filters you have access to can also be managed from this Manage filters option in the top-level Issues menu. Now we're logged in as Anne, and let's go to the issue search screen. We can search for filters from here. Let's just look for all filters, and there is the filter Rachel added. Let's favorite it and select it, and the search Rachel created has executed for us, and it's listed in our FAVORITE FILTERS now as well. So now we know how to search for issues and save and share those searches as filters. Another useful feature that flows from issue search is the ability to apply a change to multiple issues at once from search results. Let's try that in the next clip.
Bulk Editing Issues

We've edited individual issues previously in this course, but sometimes you need to make the same change to multiple issues at once. Bulk operations can be applied to issues resulting from a search. Let's give it a try. Here we are logged in as Rachel again, and she'd like to label issues that have to do with staff regardless of whether there are staff related features in the Fitness Tracker application or issues related to hiring or training employees in the Grand Opening project. It's not something she wants to track as an epic, and it doesn't make sense as a component, but a label is a good fit. For new issues, she can just apply a label at creation time, but she'd like to label prior issues. The first step is to use the Jira search kung fu we've already learned to locate those issues. Let's go to advanced issue search, and Rachel has a few keywords in mind that'll probably locate issues she's interested in, training, login, and hire. Let's enter an advanced query to look for those words. The word text here is a JQL keyword that will look in all fields for issues, including custom ones, and the tilde is a contains operator. So this advanced search translates to match any issues containing the words trainer, login, or hire in any field. All righty, let's run that. And these issues look like a match. There are some staff login related issues and hiring issues. But we also have some issue types here that aren't a good fit. There are epics and subtasks here in these results again. And Rachel doesn't want those, so let's add a not in clause like we used previously to the query. And run that, and that looks better. If we open up the detail view for one of these issues, we can see the Labels field here. But again, we don't want to edit them individually, so let's go up here to this Tools drop-down menu and select Bulk Change, and here we see a list of the issues in our search. We have a checkbox to select all of them and one for each individual issue. Let's select all first, but there's one issue for member login that doesn't have to do with staff, so we'll deselect that one. Then we go to the next screen, and we get a list of operations we can apply to our selected set of issues. We're going to select Edit, and then we go to a lengthy screen of possible fields we can change. Here's the label field, and we want to add an additional label, and we'll name that label staff. Then we proceed to confirm the change, and that may take a moment. Okay, that's done, and we can see the label is now applied to these issues. So that's a bulk change in Jira. Next, let's take a look at issue reporting.
Using Canned Jira Reports

There is nothing more exciting than reporting, right? Well, okay, maybe not. But Jira does have some pretty nice-looking interactive reports built in. There's too many to look at individually, but we'll see a few in this clip and get a pretty good feel for them. The person most interested in reporting on work other people are doing on our team is definitely Rachel. So we're logged in as her, and we'll see what we can find. Reports are associated with boards in Jira, at least as far as I can tell, and that leads to some interesting consequences we'll see in a moment. Here we are on the Fitness Tracker board, and remember this is a Scrum project with a Scrum board. The reports are available on the left navigation bar, this little graph icon, so we'll go there, and here are some nice thumbnail views and descriptions of many reports. There is an Agile section, an Issue analysis section, and a Forecast & management section. This Agile section at the top has a number of reports that are specific to Scrum and rely on your board having sprints. Let's take a look at a burndown chart. This is basically a chart showing how issues were resolved over time in a specific sprint, in this case, Sprint 1. The red line is remaining work, and the gray would be a healthy incremental average. Since Fitness Tracker is sadly not a real project, these lines for Sprint 1 aren't realistic. I closed all the issues at once. If we scroll a little further down, we can see a list of issues involved in the report and actions that were taken that affected the plot of the lines, such as a scope change, which is common to a lot of these different report types. You can also click through to view individual issues. We have a drop list to change the sprint, so here is Sprint 3, which is still in progress, and the plotting mechanism, story points in our case, but some projects may have time estimates. Let's look at a velocity chart. For iterative Agile methodologies like Scrum and XP, velocity is a way of measuring how much work a team typically gets done in an iteration to help estimate future work. So here we can see Bob and Anne are averaging around 13 points per sprint thus far. How unlucky. Now let's check out the Grand Ppening project's reports and see how a Kanban board's reports vary. The big difference is fewer Agile reports. Basically, just two that don't depend on sprint data are here, Cumulative Flow and the Control Chart. The issue analysis and forecasting reports are largely the same ones that were present for a Scrum board. Let's take a look at a Cumulative Flow Diagram, which shows the change in the count of issues in various statuses over time, and for Grand Opening, it looks like they're doing pretty well. Definitely more issues are getting done than are being added to the backlog over time. The time period can be changed, and various issue types can be filtered out of the flow report. Now let's take a look at a Control Chart, which is a complicated one. This chart tries to give you a handle on how much time it takes in days for issues to be resolved. By default, this is showing cycle time, which is the amount of time it takes to complete an issue from when it first starts work. The average here is about three days, represented by the orange line. Time is progressing on the X axis, so you can see how your cycle time changes as the project goes along. The light blue area is the standard deviation around that average, and a wide deviation means the project is not very predictable with cycle time. A very narrow band means most issues take about the same amount of time to complete. The green dots are clusters representing issues or groups of issues at a particular time. You can select these to see details and even navigate to those particular issues. There are a lot of customization options below the chart, including the timeframe of the report and statuses to include in the calculations. If we included Backlog here, which is the initial status in the workflow for Grand Opening issues, the control chart would be measuring lead time instead of cycle time. Lead time is how long it took for an item to complete from when it was first created as opposed to when work first started on it. Let's go to the Overall board. Remember, this board is a Kanban board that pulls issues from both the Grand Opening and Fitness Tracker projects. And Jira surprises me here. There are reports, but only one, just the Control Chart. The Control Chart does include both Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening issues, but I'm not certain why some of the other reports aren't available for this multi-project board. Certainly, a lot of issue analysis and forecasting reports were present on both our Scrum board for Fitness Tracker and our Kanban board for Grand Opening, so why a Kanban board pulling issues from both of those projects would have none of those reports I'm uncertain. Possibly a bug or just something they didn't expect with multi-project boards. Regardless, most of these reports seem to print rather well despite their interactive nature. There isn't a print button for them, but a browser print works fine. So this is where to find reports in Jira, and the small sampling we looked at should give you an idea of how they work in general. That's it for issue searching and reporting.
Module Summary

In this module, we searched for issues and explored Jira's search capabilities, including basic search, which is a series of drop-down selection filters on various fields; advanced search, which is a query language; and smart quick search, the search field in the upper navigation of Jira that supports special keywords. We exported the results of a search to a spreadsheet, created a search filter for issues organized by their epics, and shared that with the Carved Rock team, applied a label to multiple issues with the bulk edit operation, and took a look at the reports available in Jira and ran a few of them. In the next module, we'll look at another way to see what's going on in a Jira instance in addition to boards, issue searches, and reports, dashboards.
Using and Customizing Dashboards to Save Your Team Time
Module Overview

Now that we're up to speed on using boards and finding issues, another great information radiator provided by Jira is a dashboard. Dashboards can display information or activity from multiple projects, and since you can view them easily as soon as you log in, they can save you time digging for key information in other places. In this module, we'll create a dashboard, see how to share and manage dashboards, take a look at some of the dashboard gadgets offered by Jira, and add some of those gadgets to our new dashboard to help the Carved Rock team. All right, let's go go gadget.
Demo: Creating and Managing Dashboards

In this clip, we'll create a custom dashboard for the Carved Rock team, share it, and see how to manage favorite dashboards. Here we are logged in as Rachel again, and if we take a look at the Fitness Tracker board, we can see Sprint 4 is now underway focused on goal setting and tracking work. On the GrOnd opening board, Jake has finished some hiring, but still working a few issues. So Rachel can certainly go to these boards or the overall board we created earlier, but an overall status at a glance in a condensed form is really still something she needs and could benefit the whole team. A dashboard displayed at login would be a good solution for that, but the System Dashboard does not have a lot of project-specific status on it. Rachel can see recent activity, but that doesn't give any impression of how much work is left or how much has been done and in what areas. So, let's create a dashboard. We'll go to Manage Dashboards in the primary navigation bar, and from here we can view our favorite boards, boards the logged in user created, popular boards in the Jira instance, search for boards, and create a new dashboard. We will call our new dashboard Opening Readiness, skip the description, and we could start this dashboard as a copy of another dashboard, but we'll start it from scratch, and we'll let any user logged in to this Jira instance view it. Okay, that's it. We have a new dashboard. Jira has made it a favorite for Rachel by default, so it shows up under Favorites and also, since she created it, under My. Now we only have one favorite dashboard at the moment, so if we go back to our home page, that's now the dashboard that gets displayed. If we have multiple favorite dashboards, we can select between them. Let's go back to Manage Dashboards, and let's find the System Dashboard that we started out with. Now we'll favorite that one, go back to our home again, and now we can see that the Opening Readiness dashboard is displaying, but we now have the sidebar where we can toggle the view between our favorites. Current favorited dashboards also show up in the top Dashboards menu. Okay, so let's go back to manage these again, and we can also control the order of the favorites in that sidebar using these chevron icons here on the right. Okay, the System Dashboard is boring, and we hate it now, so let's unfavorite that, and we can get back to editing the properties of a dashboard using this menu here. There's nothing on our new dashboard yet, but since we shared it with any logged in user, Anne, Jake, and Bob should already have access to it. Here we are logged in as Anne, and to find dashboards, you can also use the Manage Dashboards menu item and then go to either Search or Popular. The fact that Rachel has this new dashboard as a favorite is enough to make it popular, so we can favorite it from here, and Anne could have the System Dashboard as a favorite as well and toggle between them or only have the Readiness dashboard as a favorite and not have the favorite sidebar at all. Each user has their own choice. Okay, Jira is complaining that we have no gadgets, and that is an unacceptable situation. All this blank space is creeping me out, so let's fix that in the next clip.
Demo: Adding Gadgets to a Dashboard

In this clip, we'll add gadgets to our new dashboard that give the team important status information immediately when they log in. We're logged in as Rachel at dashboard management, and we'll select our new dashboard. These outlined areas are drop targets for gadgets. Let's begin adding with this spot on the left. This is the gadget selection dialog, and sometimes you need to ask it to load up all the gadgets, so we'll do that, and now we have 31 to select from. There are other gadgets, both free and paid, in the Atlassian Marketplace. There are category filers, but honestly, I don't find them overly helpful. I usually scroll until I find what I want or use the search field. The first thing I want to add is an Activity Stream, which we already had on the System Dashboard, but we'll include it here as well since our new dashboard will likely be the one the team uses exclusively. So we'll just click Add gadget, and this usually fools me. Jira has added that gadget already in the background. The dialog stayed open, so I can add more gadgets in one go, but usually that results in me clicking the same gadget over and over again and adding duplicates in the background. I'm a silly goose. So anyway, we'll close this dialog, and there's our gadget. Each gadget has its own configuration settings. We'll just call this Activity, and we could add filters to fine-tune what kind of activity appears, but we'll just let it show all activity in the Jira instance. And 10 items is fine. Most gadgets have an auto refresh option of some kind. The way I see teams use dashboards is usually just to consume the information on them when they log in or by hitting the home icon to go to their dashboard rather than a constantly displayed screen, so I'll leave the refresh unchecked. There's an option to display dashboards as wall boards if you want to leave them up on a monitor in your team room. So let's save that configuration, and there's our first gadget on the dashboard. There are some view preferences for this particular gadget. We can change it to a list view, which condenses what's displayed, and I like that better than the full view, so we'll leave it like that. We can also choose to filter what's shown from here or subscribe to an RSS feed of the activity events on the gadget. All gadgets have a more menu in the corner where you can change the title bar color of the gadget, minimize them, delete them, edit their configuration, or force a refresh of displayed data. You can also maximize and minimize using this icon, and the cross is a drag handle to reposition the gadget to another drop target. We're in two column equal width layout now, but we can change that with this Edit layout button. And there are five options to choose from, but we'll stay in two equal columns mode. Okay, we can't eat just one gadget, so let's try another one. Since we expect this dashboard will effectively replace the System Dashboard, we also want the Assigned to Me gadget here. Let's add that. And we have an opportunity to customize this gadget to better fit our team. Since they rely on rank to handle priority, the priority field doesn't help much, so we'll remove it. And epic categorization is important to them, so let's add Epic Link. Okay, let's save that, and that one's done. Rachel doesn't have any work assigned to her, how she manages that is a secret I want to learn, but we'll see what this gadget looks like for another team member in a moment. Now it's time to add a gadget that provides some new information for the team. Progress by epic is important for Carved Rock. The best fit I can find for that with the out-of-the-box gadgets is a Two Dimensional Filter, so let's try that. This one pulls data from a saved filter, so we'll use the Carved Rock All Issues filter we created in the previous module. For the XAxis, we'll choose Status, and for the Y, Epic Link. And let's save that, and there we are. There's all the issues for the opening effort distributed by status and epic. Telemetry support and login and role management are completely done. Goal setting and tracking work is ongoing, and there are three issues not assigned to an epic that aren't completed yet. The filter from the previous module is screening out subtasks and epics from this chart, which is perfect. I do wish I could control the X-axis order or that it's sorted the statuses more intuitively on its own so that not started status types are on the left, in progress types in the middle, and done types consistently on the right. But even as is, this is a great picture of where the team is by epic in a small footprint. A gadget with completion bars for epics, like the ones on a backlog view, might be better, but this is nice. Like most of these gadgets, the numbers here are links. I can click through on one, say all the in-progress issues, and there they are, an easy click away. All right, back to our dashboard and we'll keep gadgeting. Another handy thing for Rachel would be a quick overall status by project. Let's try this Projects gadget. We'll pick Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening, use the most detailed view, and we'll use two columns within the gadget. There we go. These bars show the open issues in each of the projects. The longer the bar, the more open issues. The color is based on priority of issues, so that's not too helpful for us since we aren't using the priority field. All of our issues have medium priority, so we'll always have a solid yellow bar, but that's okay. We'll play with this gadget more in a moment. Let's add our last one. The Fitness Tracker application is obviously a big part of our readiness, so how the current sprint is going for that team is a great thing for everyone to see quickly. The Sprint Health Gadget is designed for that, so let's add it. Let's also show the assignees for issues in the current sprint on that gadget, and there we go. We can easily see that Sprint 4 is the current sprint. They have three story points of work not yet started, six story points underway, none complete yet, but with plenty of time left in the sprint. We can click through to see what an individual team member is working on. Okay, so we may have over gadgeted a little here. Some of our gadgets are off screen. I do have this browser view zoomed some for this course, so let's switch for a moment to a wider view, and there we go. Let's take Assigned to Me and put it on the right under the Projects gadget. There, we can see everything in one look with this arrangement. Let's log in as Anne now, and there's our new dashboard in all its glory with Anne's current story showing in the Assigned to Me gadget with its Epic Link. On the Projects gadget, we can hover over these bars and see how many open issues there are in each project. Five for Fitness Tracker. Four for Grand Opening. Clicking through them does not work properly. I venture to say that this is a bug. But if you select this little graph icon here on the gadget, an invisible option appears. And if you click on that invisible option, there are the unresolved issues for that project. So this gadget might need an intervention, but it's still useful. So there's our new dashboard, and it should give the whole team great status information at a glance on login with click-through access to more detailed information.
Module Summary

In this module, we created an overall status dashboard for the Carved Rock team to show their readiness for opening day and allow them to quickly drill down on details. We learned how to manage multiple dashboards, including sharing them with others and managing favorites. We added gadgets to our dashboard showing disposition of issues by epic, overall status of both projects, and status of the current Fitness Tracker sprint. We have a lot of status information that's in our Jira instance now at the fingertips of the Carved Rock team. In the next module, we'll show how information from another system can also be incorporated in Jira as we see how to make use of source code repository data inside Jira.
Using Jira with a Repository
Module Overview

We've been using Jira to track progress being made by the Carved Rock team, and all the status information we've tracked so far on reports, dashboards and boards has all been created in Jira itself. If you're using Jira with a team that's creating software, your source code repository in your version control system can be integrated with Jira and provide valuable information about what's happening to the code related to Jira issues, and that information can be viewed right inside of Jira. In this module, we'll discuss some the options available for connecting source code repositories to Jira, we'll discuss some of the benefits you can get from integrating information from your source repository with Jira, and we'll see examples of repository change information related to the Fitness Tracker application the Carved Rock team is building shown within the Jira system. If you won't be using Jira for software development projects, feel free to skip over this module. I promise not to cry too loudly.
Demo: Connecting Jira to a Repository

There are a lot of source code version control systems being used today and many options for connecting a repository from those systems to Jira. This isn't a technical how-to clip. The administrator of your Jira instance will need to determine how to integrate your version control system, but we'll explore some possibilities in this clip and take a quick look at the option we'll be using for Fitness Tracker. We haven't actually written any code for the Fitness Tracker application. That would be fun, but I do have a repository created to play with on GitHub, a popular hosting service for Git repositories. If you want to play with some of these features, just create an empty repository of your own on GitHub. This repository I didn't make public since it doesn't have anything in it but a README file, but we'll pretend that's the whole Fitness Tracker application. Here we are at the Atlassian Marketplace. As we'll see in a moment, Jira has built-in support to connect to some version control systems, but the Marketplace is a great to look, along with just an internet search, for add-on options to connect your own version control system. Not all integration options will be found inside the Marketplace, but many will. So let's search for Git. Although Jira does have some built-in support for Git, here's a plugin I've used before and like, Git Integration for Jira, and there are quite a few other options here. Git Integration for Jira is a paid add-on, but it has some nice features, and it supports many of the major Git platforms. Subversion is another popular version control system, and there are integration options here. Team Foundation Server, the same. So the Marketplace is a good starting point to explore. Jira Cloud and Jira Server add-ons can both be found here. You can conduct a Marketplace search from within your Jira instance as well if you have access to the administrative part of the application. Let's take a look at that. Here we are logged into Jira as Rachel. Source repository integration features are in the administrative part of Jira under Applications. I'm not entirely clear on the distinction between the term add-on and application in Jira. Probably there are add-ons that don't extend Jira in such a way as to be considered applications, but that's a guess on my part. In any case, I believe all of the repository integration capabilities, after they're installed as add-ons, will have their configuration here under Applications. We can navigate to Add-ons, and here's where the Marketplace search will be, to look for new add-ons or manage ones already installed. Back to Applications, and let's take a quick spin through the relevant ones. DVCS accounts is a built-in Git Integration that comes with Jira. We can use it to connect to Bitbucket Cloud or GitHub. Bitbucket's an Atlassian Git hosting service, but it can also be run on premise. FishEye is also a product made by Atlassian that acts as a kind of front end to a variety of version control systems. It has its own features and user interface, but can also act as a middleman for Jira integration with various version control systems. Crucible is another Atlassian product that provides code review features that can be integrated into Jira. So these are all options to consider, But let's take a look at Git Integration for Jira, which is the one we're using. I used it for this course primarily because I'm already familiar with it, and it supports a wider range of Git hosting options than Jira's canned DCVS connector. It can connect to an on-premises or cloud Git repository just with click. Our Fitness Tracker repository is already connected here. Detailed configuration options for the add-on are here, but we're using all of the defaults currently. So this should give you a general feel of what's possible and also make it obvious that generally there isn't going to be just one way to connect your version control system. You'll have a range of options and will likely want to experiment to see what works best for you. So that's an idea of how in terms of integrating version control with Jira. In the next clip, we'll take a look at why.
Demo: Using Repository Integration Features

So what's the point of integrating your version control system and project repository with Jira? In this clip, we'll make some changes to the Fitness Tracker code, see what kind of information pops up in Jira, and discuss how you might leverage that. Here we are on GitHub, and we'll simulate Anne or Bob making a code change by editing this very complicated README file directly from here. Now to commit, we need to add a commit comment, or message. By including the Jira issue ID, an integrated Jira instance will associate that commit with the indicated issue. I believe the issue ID can go anywhere in the commit message stream, but I usually put it at the front. There are other keywords you may be able to include to cause things to happen in Jira, like changing the issue status just from the commit message, but this depends on your specific integration. Linking the commit to an issue in Jira by mentioning the issue ID in the message is going to work with all integrations though, and this really buys you a lot as we'll see in a moment. So we'll link this small change with issue FT-24, which is an issue currently assigned to Sprint 4 of Fitness Tracker, and commit that change. Now back to Jira, and we're logged in as Rachel. There's a Git menu here, which the Git Integration for Jira add-on added to our navigation options. Shortcuts to browse and manage repositories we've integrated with using this add-on will appear here. But let's go to the Sprint 4 board. There is a new board navigation icon here for Git Commits. Our add-on has added this view to our board. Commits related to any issue currently on the board will be here, and there's our commit for issue FT-24. This three-colored bar indicates that we've modified one line. Added lines would be green and deleted line count red. There are links to all kinds of additional details. Let's go back to the active sprint tab though. We'll select FT-24, and the detail view shows the commit information for that specific story. This particular tool allows us to perform some Git-specific operations from this view as well. If we select the commit, we're taken to the full issue view for FT-24, and under this Git Commits tab we have the same block on information we saw a moment ago, but all commits just for this issue would appear here. If we click on this crazy string, which for Git is the commit hash, we can see exactly what was changed for each file in this commit right here in Jira. So every commit made to complete the issue can be viewed down to every line of code that was changed. By selecting that commit hash, we went into the repository browsing view of our add-on, which has other options as well. Under the Commits tab here, I can see all the commits for the current branch. I'm just barely scratching the surface here of the features possible with Jira version control integration, but already consider the impact. Minute detail of every code change associated with work on a particular issue is right at your fingertips in Jira for the duration of the project. This is handy for developers, but if you have testers on your project as well, this allows them to directly check what was changed for a particular issue without learning the details of your version control system or having to use IDE or other tool integrated with the version control system. If you're using Jira for a software development effort, some form of integration between Jira and source control is something you should absolutely consider.
Module Summary

In this module, we summarized some of the options you have to integrate a version control system with Jira. The Marketplace is a great place to look first for integration add-ons. We made a simple code change for Fitness Tracker and saw just from adding the issue key into the commit message a lot of detailed information about that change was made available directly in Jira. We discussed some of the benefits to the team of having source code change information in Jira where the bugs and features you've work on are all available and provide an easy hook to drill down to find code changes associated with each one of them, or groups of issues, such as all the code changes for a particular epic. Sprint 4 was the last sprint for the Fitness Tracker application, and the Carved Rock team is almost ready for their grand opening. We've been working with two projects in Jira that I've created before the course started. In the next module, we'll create a new project and get an overview of some of the customization options for projects.
Creating and Configuring a Project
Module Overview

Both the Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening projects I created for this course before we started. We talked about creating projects early in the course and different types of project templates, but we haven't created one ourselves yet. In this module, we'll take a look at the variety of project templates Jira offers and the things you may want to consider when choosing a template. We'll create a project from a template and also discuss creating a project from another project's configuration, and we'll take a tour of some of the ways you can configure projects using project settings.
Demo: Creating a Project in Jira

So, let's create a project. There are a couple of ways to do that in Jira, but the primary way is by choosing from a project template that Jira provides. Here we are logged in as Rachel in the Jira Server Software product we've been using primarily throughout this course. The Create project option can be found on the Projects top-level menu, and here we have a pop-up dialog where we can select how we want to create the project. Templates available to the Jira instance are listed on this dialog, and we can see the Scrum and Kanban template options here, which is how I created the Fitness Tracker and Grand Opening projects, respectively. We'll select a template in a moment, but first, let's investigate this Create with shared configuration option. This allows us to create a project from an existing project's settings. It won't copy issues from the source project to the new one. The new project will start empty, but some of the configuration, like issue types and workflow, will be copied to the new project. If we click on this additional info icon, we can get an idea of what types of settings will be carried over from the source project. Jira doesn't currently allow you to create custom project templates, so if you need to create multiple similarly configured projects that include customizations from the canned templates, this is the way to do it. So let's go back to template selection. The team is about to be done with all the work to prepare for Carved Rock's opening, and Rachel would like to celebrate with a party for the whole team. To plan this party, being Rachel, she'll use Jira. Let's take a look at a few templates. Let's try Scrum, and the next dialog shows us the basic workflow that a project created with this template starts with along with the starting issue types and a general idea of what kind of projects this template might be good for. We don't need sprints for party planning. That's overdosing on project management, so let's back out of this one. What about some of these business project templates? Since we aren't creating software for our party planning, one of those might make sense. How about Process management? A party's a process. Yikes, that's a complicated workflow. The issue types look pretty good, but that workflow is way more than we need. So let's back up again and try maybe Task management. Organize and assign simple tasks. That sounds promising. Okay, this does actually look pretty good, but Rachel would like a workflow that has an end progress step. So let's back up again and take a look at Project management. Okay, that looks perfect. Just tasks and subtasks for issue types and a TO DO, IN PROGRESS, and DONE workflow. So let's select this one, and for our project name we'll keep it simple and go with Party! The key prefix for issues is being generated for us automatically, but we could override that if we wanted here and also designate a different project label, but we'll keep Rachel. So that's it, and let's get this party going. There's our new project. There are no issues yet, of course, but notice one strange thing. There's no active board, no place to drag issues as they change status. We can get a list of issues, but no board with columns. So what's up with that? This is really a missing feature in the Jira Server product. Projects created from the business project templates, as far as I can tell, don't get boards in Jira Server. If you're in Jira Cloud, they do. What options you have when you create projects is one of the areas where Jira Server and Jira Cloud installations differ, so let's take a look at the options we have in Jira Cloud. Here we are in Carved Rock's Jira Software Cloud instance. We select the Projects tab on the sidebar here, and on the Projects screen there's a Create project button. Let's try that, and we'll go with a Classic project, and here we have templates again, but there are quite a few more than there were in Jira Server. Let's create a project using the same Project Management template, here in the Cloud, and we'll call it the same, and there we go. Our new project has a simple board here. Hopefully boards for business projects will make it into the Jira Server product in the future. Now back to our Jira Server instance, and let's figure out how to get Rachel's project created here. I've deleted our first attempt at the Party project since it was missing a board, and we can't have that, so back to the templates. Basically, Rachel would like a to do, in progress, and done workflow, but with a board. A sprint project template is overkill. We really don't need sprints or a product backlog. But Kanban's not a bad fit. It has more issue types than we want, but we can just not use those issue types. There is a BACKLOG status. That's a bit of an overkill for party planning. I mean, unless it's a wedding after-party, then you have about a year's worth of backlog. But the BACKLOG status won't kill us either, so let's create our Party project using this template. And it's created, and there's our board. And again, there's no issues yet. But before we say so long to one another, we'll drop in here and see how the party's going. So Jira Server doesn't provide boards yet for business projects, but Kanban acts as a decent substitute for a starting point. So, those are some of the options you have when creating projects, and you may need permission to create projects if you're on a company Jira instance. So, now that we have a project created, what are some of the customization options? Well, hang on to your party hat, and let's go drop in on the next clip.
Demo: Project Settings Overview

Now that we've created a new project, let's see what our configuration options are. We aren't going to actually make any customizations to the project in this clip other than adding some users to it. This clip is intended to give you an idea of what some of your options are. The Jira Fundamentals course here at Pluralsight goes into more depth on this topic. Here we are at the Party project. I'm enjoying saying the Party project. That feels like it should be a band name. We can get to the project settings from this gear icon. So this list of settings is pretty intimidating. Again, this is a strength of Jira that it's so highly configurable, but it can also be easy to get lost. This summary page basically shows you what your current settings are for all of these settings categories listed in the sidebar on the left. It also gives you a handy short explanation of what these settings mean. For most of these categories, you can navigate to a dedicated configuration page by using the link in the sidebar on the left or the link on the summary page itself. Some options are only available in the sidebar, such as deleting the project or re-indexing the issues in the project. Let's take a look at project details. Not too much here. We can provide some additional information about our project, basically, and change the icon used for it. Since this is the Party project, let's change to something more appropriate. How about a hotdog? Project categories is an interesting one here. Project categories can be created and used to group projects in Jira, but doing that doesn't buy terribly much in terms of features, so I don't see them used frequently. So let's save these details and take a look at issue types. These are all the issue types in our project, and that's determined by the issue type scheme. If we wanted to pair this down to just task and subtask, for example, we could look for a different issue type scheme that included just those two types. The Actions operation will allow you to change the scheme for a given setting. This page also shows what workflow, screen, and field configuration is used for each of these issue types. So let's take a look at the workflow. We saw this part of project settings earlier in the course, but to reiterate, the workflow scheme your project is on is shown here, and when you create a new project, Jira creates a workflow scheme specifically for it. The scheme dictates a workflow for each issue type, and in our case, all of the issue types in the project are on a simplified Kanban workflow that Jira also created just for our project. We can switch to a different scheme for this project or modify the existing scheme by adding a workflow to it. We visited the Screens part of settings earlier in this course as well when we were adding the story points field to the create and edit screen of the Fitness Tracker project. Project screen schemes map issue types to particular screens for functions like create and edit. A project can have multiple screen schemes if there are different screens to be used for different issue types. For a project created from the Kanban template, as our Party project was, we can see that Jira gave us two screen schemes, one screen for bugs and one for all other issue types. This is because bugs may have additional fields, such as affected version and environment, that don't make sense for other issue types. We can click through to a screen in one of the schemes to modify the field shown on it and the field order, as we did previously in the course. We haven't visited field configuration before. This one's a little confusing with regard to its relationship to screens. Your screen definitions control what fields are on a particular screen and how they're ordered and grouped. Your field configuration specifies what fields are available to your project to use on any screen and whether or not a field is required for an issue and also allows a custom description to be provided for a field that users will see on the screens. If you don't want to prioritize issues by rank the priority field can be important, and you might not like Jira's default names for priorities, such as blocker. A Jira administrator can create custom priorities and group those into a priority scheme, and then you can switch to a custom priority scheme from the settings page. Users and roles is where you maintain what other Jira users are members of your project and what permissions they have. You can specify this at a group level or at the individual user level. Let's add Anne and Jake and Bob as administrators of the Party project. There we go. Your notification settings control emails sent when certain events occur in your project. There are notification schemes, and you can switch your project to a different scheme from here. So those are the primary customization points for projects. Again, Jira Fundamentals goes into more detail on a few of these, but that should give you a good idea of the project configuration possibilities.
Module Summary

In this module, we created a new project for the Carved Rock team's celebration planning. We saw some of the project templates available in Jira for both Jira Server and Jira Cloud, and we looked at some business project templates for the first time. We also saw how to create a project from another project instead of from a template. We took a tour through the major customization options available under a project's settings, and we modified the Users and roles section for the Party project. Next, we'll talk about some additional resources to learn more about Jira and check in on how the Party project's going.
Learning More
Additional Learning Resources

Hopefully we've covered Jira's basic features well enough at this point for you to be productive using it with your own teams and projects, but there are some resources where you can learn more and get additional help if you need it. Let's take a look at those before we shut off the lights here. The first place to look is, of course, right here at Pluralsight. This course has been focused entirely on the basics for daily usage of Jira, but there are several other courses here with slightly different focuses and complementary material. We've mentioned the Jira Fundamentals Pluralsight course several times in previous modules, and this is a great additional learning resource. This course gives you information to choose from the various Jira products if you don't already have an installation you're working with. It also offers some comparisons with other status tracking tools. It goes into installing Jira, administering a Jira instance, and extending it with third-party add-ons. It also has a great section on the Jira Query Language with some power-user tricks and provides more examples of customizing a project than this Getting Started course covered. If you're more curious about how to use Jira to support either Scrum or Kanban, there are the Jira for Scrum and Jira for Kanban courses. They go more into the practices and mechanics of these two software development methodologies and how Jira supports them. So, try these courses out if they seem to fit what you're interested in, and if there's some other aspect of Jira you'd like to see covered more in depth here at Pluralsight, feel free to drop a comment in the discussion section of this course. Atlassian has a lot of online documentation and support for all of its products, including Jira. Let's take a look. If you're having a problem with Jira or just have a question about a feature, a good place to look first is the Atlassian Community at community.atlassian .com. Atlassian employees and product champions will answer questions here. Let's try a search. How about business projects and you're a Server not having a board since we discovered that during the course. And there's someone asking about that. And if we drill down, we'd see someone from Atlassian addressing the question and linking to a feature request that you can vote on. Generally, if you do an internet search for a Jira issue, you'll get hits back that point to community.atlassian .com, but I often just come straight here and look for an answer to my question. If you need to report a problem with Jira, support.atlassian .com is the place to do that. Okay, let's take a quick look at Atlassian's online documentation for the Jira products. I usually get to these through the support.atlassian .com domain. There are links here to the community and documentation both. If we drill down into Docs, we can see it's organized by product with Jira Software, Jira Core, and Jira Service Desk having their own links, but also tabs specific to Cloud and Server offerings. And if we drill down from here, let's try Jira Software, we can find a number of starting points. The What's new section is a handy one where you'll find the latest release notes, and we can search for a topic from pretty much any level of the documentation as well. There are also menus here in the corner to switch to the documentation for a specific version of the product or to toggle between Cloud and Server product documentation. So those are some of the options to learn more about Jira and also find support if you need it. If you post questions on this course's Discussion tab, I'll try to address them, of course, but the Atlassian Community site is a great place to go for that.
Course Summary

So it's time to wrap things up finally. This course was intended to get you ready to use Jira on a daily basis with a team. And to that end, we created issues, planned projects, and tracked issue status using both Kanban and Scrum boards, customized several boards to better fit team needs. We searched for issues, saved searches as filters, and tried out bulk edit. We ran some of the canned Jira reports for our projects, created a custom dashboard for the team. We integrated a Git code repository with our Jira instance and viewed commit information related to a Jira issue, and we created a simple project from a template. Let's sneak a peek one last time at what the Carved Rock team is up to. Our dashboard shows work for all the epics complete and no open issues in either the Fitness Tracker or our Grand Opening projects. The party planning is in the progress, and it looks as if the team finally managed to assign some issues to Rachael for her to work. No anchovies. The team's ready to open their business, and hopefully you're ready to show off your Jira kung fu to coworkers. Thanks for sticking with me for Jira: Getting Started.
