Bits and Bytes

The smallest unit a computer can understand is called a bit. The values for a bit is either 0 or 1. Consider a voltage. It can be 0V or 1.5V or whatever the core CPU voltage is. CPU does not understand numbers but voltages :-). You cannot expect an electronics hardware to understand the same semantics of 0 and 1 which we know. 0 and 1 are abstraction of CPUs voltages in programming. Four bits form a nibble and eight form a byte. A byte is the area of memory which can be addressed by CPU and its content manipulated. To address a memory a CPU has say 4 or 8 or up to 256 pins. For example, in a common 32-bit CPU there are 32 pins whose voltages may represent 0 or 1. Consider all pins are low i.e. 0 then the memory location pointed to is 00000000000000000000000000000000 i.e. a 8 bit memory at location 0 can be accessed. This memory is also called primary memory or RAM (Random Access Memory). So computing this way we can see that a 32-bit processor can access 232
bytes or 4,294,967,296 bytes. You can arrive at this number by 4*1024*1024*1024. This is equivalent to 4GB of RAM. However, modern Intel processors have 36 physical pins to address up to 64GB of memory. That does not mean that all 64-bit CPUs have 64 pins for addressing memory as 16 Exabytes(approximately 16∗1018

) is really, really huge amount of memory which is not needed by any single monolithic system practically and will be very expensive, thus it is not practical.

Since a byte has 8 bits, its value may range from 0 to 255 as 28
is 256. For unsigned data type this will be the range. When all bits are 0 value is zero and when all are high it is 255. Computers use two’s complement form to represent binary number. So if these 8-bits represent signed number the range will be from −28 to 28−1 that is -128 to 127. As you will see later at lowest levels C allows you to access even one bit using something called bit-fields. If you read specification it will signify the range of one 8-bit byte as -127 to 127 because it also takes in to consideration of 1’s complement computers in which positive and negative zeroes are different.
