Applets
An applet is a special kind of Java program that is designed to be transmitted over the Internet and automatically executed inside a Java-compatible web browser. If the user clicks a link that contains an applet, the applet will download and run in the browser automatically. Applets were intended to be small programs, typically used to display data provided by the server, handle user input, or provide simple functions, such as a loan calculator. The key feature of applets is that they execute locally, rather than on the server. In essence, the applet allowed some functionality to be moved from the server to the client.

However, applets rely on a Java browser plug-in. Thus, for an applet to work, it must be supported by the browser. Recently, support for the Java browser plug-in has been waning. Simply put, without browser support, applets are not viable. Because of this, beginning with JDK 9, the phase-out of applets was begun, with support for applets being deprecated. In the language of Java, deprecated means that a feature is still available but flagged as obsolete. Thus, a deprecated feature should not be used for new code. The phase-out became complete with the release of JDK 11 because support for applets was removed.

Servlet
A Java servlet is a small program that executes on a server. Servlets dynamically extend the functionality of a web server. It is helpful to understand that as useful as client-side applications can be, they are just one half of the client/server equation. Not long after the initial release of Java, it became obvious that Java would also be useful on the server side. The result was the servlet. Thus, with the advent of the servlet, Java spanned both sides of the client/server connection.
