If programs are used, they are also updated, and if you are the developer of a program, this means that you will need to edit the source code in order to add features and fix errors. If your code is not well organized, it will be hard to read and maintain because you will need much more time to find where to insert your new code or where that nasty error might be.

One measure to make your code easier to handle is to distribute it into several logical blocks. But how do we decide what will go into such a block? There are no fixed rules for how this is done, but the language you use might give you some hints, depending on how it wants you to structure the code. In the end, it is up to you to make the final decision.

you will have sections of your code that logically belong together, where
some things are done to enable you to do other things. We need to keep this in mind when deciding on how to split the code into some logical blocks.
There can be other reasons, other than readability, for having code separated from other parts of the program. You might have developed this smart thing that you want to reuse in other programs or even distribute it to others so they can also use it. To be able to do that, the code that defines this smart thing must be separate from the rest of the program. This means that it cannot be tightly entangled with other parts of the code. If it is, it will be hard to reuse this section of your program.

An individual, logical group of code is often called a module. The term module will have a slightly different meaning, depending on what language we are using. However, all of them will agree that it is a section of code that is independent, though how it is handled will differ. Some languages say that each module will go into a separate file, or multiple files if it is a large and more complex module. Others will have ways to define several modules within one single file. In some circumstances, the term module will hardly ever be used, even if the concept of independent sections of code exist.

One benefit of treating code as independent modules is, as we already stated, to be able to reuse the module in other applications. Another reason to do this is that it will be easier for us to change or replace a module. If our code sections are intertwined and depend heavily on each other, changing parts of the code will be harder as we need to make these changes at multiple locations throughout the code, and we need to make sure that we have found all occurrences where we need to make changes. When we have broken up our code into these smaller modules, we need to put everything together into what will be our final application. To do this, we will need to store the modules in a project.
