Reason 5: Performance

When React was first released, its performance was striking and helped set it apart from the competition. The React team recognized that JavaScript is fast, but it's the DOM that makes it feel slow. They realized that updating the DOM is expensive, so they found that updating the DOM in the most efficient way would help enhance performance. So behind the scenes, when you change data, React intelligently figures out the most efficient way to update the DOM. When React was created, years ago, this was a novel design that gave React a notable performance advantage in many cases. See, before React, most libraries would unintelligently update the DOM to reflect the new state. This often lead to redrawing a significant portion of the page, even when only a minor change had occurred. In contrast, React monitors the values of each component state. When a component state changes, React compares the existing DOM state to what the new DOM should look like. It then determines the least expensive way to update the DOM. This sounds complicated, but it's all handled automatically behind the scenes. And there are multiple benefits to this approach. It helps avoid layout thrashing, which is when a browser has to recalculate the position of everything when a DOM element changes. And being efficient is increasingly important in a world where many people are using mobile devices. Mobile devices vary widely in their CPU power, and conserving battery life is a concern as well. This also enables React simple programming model. When data changes, React efficiently updates the DOM automatically, and there's nothing extra that you have to do to enjoy this performance benefit. When you update the state of a component, it happens automatically. The comparison happens in memory, so it's typically very fast. Today, a variety of other libraries use a similar approach, but Reacts performance remains quite competitive. React offers various performance optimizations, but in my experience, they're rarely necessary. React is fast enough by default that many apps run great on the first try. Of course, the library size also has an impact on performance, too. React with React DOM weighs only 35k when G‑zipped and minified, so React lends itself well to bandwidth constraint use cases like mobile. It's significantly smaller than many of its competitors, but if you need the smallest library size possible, there are alternative React‑like libraries that you can consider using as well. Inferno is a lightweight React alternative that only weighs 9k, but has a very similar API to React. And Preact is even smaller, weighing in at only 3k. Both Preact and Inferno are extremely similar to React and utilize the same API. They just omit a few features to help keep the size down. So these are great options if the bundle size is a high priority for you. And it's easy to switch to these later, if desired.
