After primitive types, all other variables in the Java programming language are reference types, better known as objects.

Objects differ from primitives in many ways, but one of the most important distinctions is that there is a notation for the absence of an object, null. Variables can be set to null, and methods can return null too. Attempting to call a method on a null reference throws a NullPointerException.

Objects are reference types. What exactly does this mean? With primitive types, when declaring a variable, int i = 42, this is being assigned to a location in memory, with the value 42. If, later in the program, another variable is assigned to hold the value currently represented by i, say, int j = i, then another location in memory has been assigned to that same value. Subsequent changes to i do not affect the value of j, and vice versa. In Java, a statement such as new ArrayList(20), requests an area in memory to store that data. When that created object is assigned to a variable, List myList = new ArrayList(20), then it can be said that myList points to that memory location. On the surface, this appears to act the same as a primitive type assignment, but it is not. If several variables are assigned to that same created object, known as an instance, then they are pointing to the same memory location. Making any changes to one instance will be reflected when accessing the other.
What effect does the final keyword have on object references?
The final keyword works in exactly the same way for objects as it does for primitive types. The value is set on variable definition, and after that, the value stored in that memory location cannot change. As previously discussed, variable definition and memory allocation are quite different between primitives and objects. Although the object reference cannot change, the values held within that object can change, unless they themselves are final.
