MySQL Workbench

There are three major workspaces in my sMySQL Workbench,
SQL development
    Open Database Connection
    Explore Database
    Execute SQL Statements

Data Modelling
    EER Model
    Reverse Engineering

Server administration.
    Start or Stop MySQL Server
    MySQL Monitor



Fundamentals of RDBMS and Database Designs

Client/Server System
The client-server model is a distributed application structure that partitions tasks or workloads between the providers of a resource or service, called servers, and service requesters, called clients.

SQL works particularly well on a client/server system.
On such a system, users on multiple client machines that connect to a server machine can access — via a network communications channel — a database that resides on the server to which they’re connected.
The application program on a client machine contains SQL data-manipulation commands. The portion of the DBMS residing on the client sends these commands to the server across a communication channel that connects the server to the client. At the server, the server portion of the DBMS interprets and executes the SQL command and then sends the results back to the client across the communication channel.
The server

Unless it receives a request, the server does nothing. If multiple clients require service at the same time, however, servers must respond quickly. Servers generally differ from client machines in terms of how much data they handle. They have large amounts of very fast disk storage, optimized for fast data access and retrieval. And because they handle traffic coming in simultaneously from multiple clients, servers need fast multi-core processors.

What the server is

The server is the part of a client/server system that holds the database. The server also holds the server software — the part of a database management system that interprets commands coming in from the clients and translates these commands into operations in the database. The server software also formats the results of retrieval requests and sends the results back to the requesting client.
What the server does

The server’s job is relatively simple and straightforward. All a server needs to do is read, interpret, and execute commands that come to it across the network from clients.

The client

The client part of a client/server system consists of a hardware component and a software component. The hardware component is the client computer and its interface to the local-area network. This client hardware may be very similar (or even identical) to the server hardware. The software is the distinguishing component of the client.
What the client is

The client’s primary job is to provide a user interface. As far as the user is concerned, the client machine is the computer, and the user interface is the application. The user may not even realize that the process involves a server.

Aside from the user interface, the client also contains the application program and the client part of the DBMS. The application program performs the specific task you require (say, in accounts receivable or order entry). The client part of the DBMS executes the application program’s commands and exchanges data and SQL data-manipulation commands with the server part of the DBMS.
What the client does

The client part of a DBMS displays information on-screen and responds to user input transmitted via the keyboard, mouse, or other input device. The client may also process data coming in from a telecommunications link or from other stations on the network.

The client part of the DBMS does all the application-specific “thinking.” To a developer, the client part of a DBMS is the interesting part. The server part just handles the requests of the client part in a repetitive, mechanical fashion.

SQL Server acts as a server – a database server, to be more specific.
Client applications, SQL  web application, your mobile application, your middle-tier, etc. connect to SQL Server to “request something” like data from or write data to a table. Since the server is the one providing a service, the client application is the one initiating the request.

In order for SQL Server (or the server) to successfully service requests from client applications, there are four (4) things that the client applications need.

Fully Qualified Domain Name or IP address.
Since the service is located somewhere in the network, the client application has to be able find it. This can be done via either a fully qualified domain name (FQDN) or an IP address. I prefer FQDNs since I can’t memorize IP addresses (who knows what public IP address Google or Microsoft will be using tomorrow). That’s why I’m a big fan of standard naming conventions. Let’s say you want to connect to a default SQL Server instance on the server named TDPRD021, the client application needs to be able to find where TDPRD021 is on the network. A simple way to check whether the client application can find the server on the network is by doing a PING test.

Port number.
A server can be running multiple services simultaneously. Your SQL Server machine is also running a Windows Update service, Network Location Awareness (NLA) service and several others. But we’re not concerned about those. What we’re interested in is the SQL Server service, the one responsible for serving database requests. Since the client application can find the server in the network via the FQDN or IP address, it needs to be able to connect to the specific service that it needs – in the case of SQL Server, the database engine service. To distinguish the database engine service from all the other services running on the server, a port number is used. You can think of the FQDN or IP address as the main telephone trunk line while the port number as the line extension of the specific person. If a client application wants to call SQL Server on the server named TDPRD021, it has to dial the IP address and request to connect to the port number. SQL Server’s default port number is 1433. For a client application to successfully connect to the SQL Server database engine service, it has to connect to the FQDN or IP address and the corresponding port number, 1433.

Authentication.
Connectivity to the server isn’t enough for a client application to make a request. For critical services that need to be protected, the client application needs to prove that it is who it says it is. This is where authentication comes in. Authentication is the process of proving that a certain claim is true and valid. So, when a client application connects to a SQL Server database, it has to provide an identity that exists in SQL Server – either a Windows login or a SQL Server login. If this identity does not exist, the client application won’t be allowed to connect. This is where you’ll get error 18456 in SQL Server. Of course, the error message returned to the client application is obfuscated for security reasons.

Authorization.
Similarly, connectivity and authentication are not enough for a client application to make a request. Let’s say the client application managed to find the SQL Server instance running on the machine named TDPRD021, connected to the correct port number and got authenticated. If an INSERT statement is executed and the identity that the client application used only has db_datareader permissions, the request won’t be completed. The identity needs to be granted the db_datawriter permissions to complete the request successfully. In other words, the identity needs to be authorized to do what it needs to do.


[Autogenerated] we will be using sequel to excess my sequel databases. At that time, the system is often called client service System. Let's understand Land service system. There are three important component for any client server system. Clients. Plans are like pieces max laptops, tablets, smartphone, etcetera, Servant server usually stores files. Spencer were stores database along with files. It is called Database. So my sequel is the best Server Application Network's network. Our communication link between Client and so beside, including Lines and Cables Network, also includes hubs and other in professed components. In many enterprises, larger office files are also stored on a network storage Networking components Connect server with network storage in simple topology, Plant and servers are both on the same network. They're often known as Len or local area network. If there are more than two lanes are located in separate geography location. That's called when, which is white area network. If we assume there's a database on this client server system, we can say that client sends request in terms of the sequel. Kredi. Tow the server, Sir. What in Terms passes the same sequel carried to the database, and the Devil's query returns the results back to the client at then client, which can be PC Mac or your handheld devices, will display the result.
Web Application Server

[Autogenerated] Now we will try to understand how the replication server works with database with real life. Example. Let's assume you want to check your email. You take your computer open it started, and then your Web browser in a Web browser. You'll type your your address as soon as you type your your address for browser will now send request. The Quest will goto Internet. Why are your eyes be? I stand for Internet service provider. Once your request goes to Internet Domain Server will now forward that request to applications over this application Server is where your email application is hosted. Application server will process all the HTML and dynamic pages. The front end off any application is pretty much same across every single user who are using this application. For example, if you're using Gmail, Yahoo or Hotmail, the look and Phil will be pretty much same across every single user off Gmail, Yahoo or Hartman. However, that e mails will be different. The data will be different. You will have data from your friend and other user will have data from their friends and relatives. Data will differ, but the page will look sane. That's exactly what will happen in application server. It will pass the stated catch demons and will pass back the dynamic pages through the application server. However, every request for data will now go toe database Ever did have a server Will help D. B. M s or database management system management system will query user's data, and we'll give it back to database. Ever. Database Server will later past Vic. The data application server, along with its CML and Dynamic page, will be written toe, Internet and at the end will Goto Web browser off user. It's hard to imagine that there will be any application without any kind of database on the back end is of 2008. My sequel is the most popular the tablet's management system on Planet Earth.
History of Relational Database Model

[Autogenerated] we notice that database management system plays a very important role in any application. There are two kind off database models. Relational database model and non volitional date of his model. My sequel is Relational, that at this model, let's quickly see couple off history bites before we moved to understanding Relational Database management system concept. In that in 1970 Dr E. Of Court has developed the concept off relational database. Any relational database will help following three most important properties. There will be less redundancy between the data. The travel off the data will be very efficient, and the data modification should be intuitive to relational database can get complex the basic three property off less redundancy efficient deterrent travel and introduce data modification usually stays the same because relational database concept and forces them. Let's see what the relational it of its concept in depth
Relational Database Model Concepts

[Autogenerated] for any relational edibles. Mortal, therefore, very important concepts. Ah, model for a little bit of estates. That data is stored in one or more tables. It also said that each table is two dimensional. If dimensions are columns and rows intersection off the columns and rows are cells. Let's see them a little bit more in detail. A table. Any relational database consists one or more tables. People are usually mortal after real world entities. For example, Address table would have addressed one addressed to city, state, country and zip code or postal code. It's quite possible on a single address. One or many different persons are staying. It's quite possible that there is nobody staying at the address as well. Address can have different types, like work, home, factory or open ground. Well, all of them can be tables. A column Ah column represents some activity or entity off the table, For example, in case off their dress as we discussed, it can be street number, apartment number, at least one city sit good or any of the details. Columns are also known as fields. Role usually contains a set of value for single instance off entity for example. In address table, it will have a single address. A single address may contain. Multiple columns are address can be apartment number, followed by street number, followed by city, state and ZIP code. If the table has multiple countries data, then there may be an additional column for country, and the rule will contain Name off the country. Well, this discussion leads to our last discussion about cells. Cells are nothing but intersection off road and column are one cell may contain apartment number and another cell may contain street number taken. Belong to different columns and taken belong to different rules. It is just an intersection, and each of the cell will have a single value. Well, think about this way. Apartment number, maybe a number. But street name may not be a number, but maybe a string. Now we're leading to. And another concept that cell you can have different kind of value. It can be a number, or it can be a string or it's quite possible. Its mix of both of them international database Everything into the table has relation to each other as well as there is relation among the tables. Well, let's see that in the next clip
Relational Database Model Keys

[Autogenerated] the most important part off any additional data base model is relations. International Database. Always relations between various stables as well as columns off different tables. They're associated with each other with primary key as well as foreign key Primary key primary key uniquely identifies it. Throw off the table. There can't be more than one primary key part table. The most important property for primary key is that it cannot allow animals. It's not necessarily that primary key has only one column that can be more than one column for Primary Key as well. When there are more than one column, belts are primary key. They're called composite columns. Let's try to understand what can be good candidate for primary key. Let's assume that your table called student, innit? People Student strength lady will be good candidate for Primary key if you have a table called Supplier. In that case, you can also go with supplier. Name is a primary key as well. In your system, you don't want to supplier with the same name, However, due to any reason, you have to supply it with the same name, and your system requirement is to allow that you might have to add another column, which we call supplier I D. Instead of identifying each row with supplier name now, you have to identify each with supplier I d. Now think off it. What could be the reason that you have a same name for two different supplier? It's quite possible both of them are supplying different thing. One is supplying pencil and another money supplying the razor. In that case, you're two options. Either you add supplier I D, which I would prefer, or you can create a composite columns as a primary key. You can use supplier, name and supply item as a composite primary key. Personally, I would add Supplier I d. The same primary key will be also another column in another table. Very well. Have foreign key relationship, are narrow primary key, translate to less vendor data and eventually leads to higher performance. Well, we'll talk about this thing with example in our advanced course, but for a moment, let's assume that you're created supply ready as a primary key. However, you still want every supplier's name unique in the system. What should be the workaround for that felt? A workaround is to create a unique e over supplier Name you. Nicky is not a primary key. However. It's still ensure the data is not duplicate. You can have multiple you Nicky in one table. You Nicky also allows one. Now various Primerica does not allow any. No, we talked about Foreign Key little bit earlier for Mt. Frankie's other columns in a table that refers to primary Key off the table. Let's assume that we have a table called Party's order in the purchase order table. We will help supply our i d. Supply ready. We'll have a foreign king relationship with the primary key off supplier table. The prime responsibility of Foreign Key is to enforce the friendship integrity throughout the databases. There can be different kind of relationship between primary key and foreign key. They can be 1211 too many or many too many relationship. Let's understand 1 to 1 relationship here. We hope person and address. One person has one address, and one address has 1%. This is 1 to 1 relationship, however, it can go complex. A one person might have multiple Idris. He might have billing, address and mailing address as well as his office address. Now a person has multiple interests. That is one too many relationship. Let's look at the same example little differently. One too many again. This time there is one interest, and there are more people person staying at that one address. Isn't that the case in our home, too? The homeless people, people staying at one single address? Let's go a little bit more real, many too many. Some might have 1 to 1 relationship with one address, and it's quite possible that certain place one address might help multiple people staying there. And it's also possible that all three off them working at the same place. This is a great example off many too many relationship here. The office address has a relationship. Where is one home address? Has one relationship and another home has to relationship. The primary task off Alicia Little base is to retrieve data efficiently from this various relationship and have listed in the data stored in database
Column Definition

[Autogenerated] column definition is very important. Recreate Primary Key, you, Nicky, FOREIGN Key and Indexes on column column Definition is very critical when we talk about performance in column definition. Did I beat reminds The type of information was stored in column. For example, we help various kind of data types string, indigent, float, date and time. We can start any correct a string in car or bark a teletype and 10 store any numeric value in indigent data type. If you have the similar value, we can put them in a float. And if we have a date, did a type. For example, birthday or anniversary date or joining date, we can use date and time. They did a type along with data type. There are few important properties off column definition as well. Let's look at them before, Will you? We can specify, had before value for any column. Let's see a scenario where you have a requirement to log current daytime off data inserted into a table. You can create a column with the name inside a date and by default, give it value off current daytime. What it means is that every single time, any date of it is inserted into that table. The column inside the date will be automatically populated with the fort, will you? But not every column qualifies for default. Value their cases. When you may not know what to put in a column at the time, you can leave the column as none. This is called no label column. Now you can have a default value in a column, or you can just leave the column. No, and there won't be any data that you can later go on an update. I got this default value. Ordinary value, Auto Increments column or to Incriminate column is a column which is continuously increasing by the interval, which we specified in a column definition. Auto Inclement column is very important because in many cases is difficult to identify. COLUMN qualifying for primary key. In that case, we can add a photo increment column now what on Cumin column will not have another value. Additionally, it will be always incriminating, distinct value. This is a good candidate for primary key. Personally, I believe defining column data types and column properties is one of the most gentle task for any database designer. With this, we complete understanding our last conception fundamental soft tabs design
Summary in Sixty Seconds

[Autogenerated] somebody in 60 seconds. Are you listening? Database consists off tables. A table consist of rows and columns. The intersection, off rows and columns is called Cell. Primerica is uniquely identifies. It throw off the table for in case and forces referential integrity. Defining that pipe off column is one of the most crucial task off database modeling. Check out other data is designing courses on neural site.
Introduction MYSQL Workbench
Introduction

[Autogenerated] Hi. This is below the way for little sight in this model. We will understand how my simple workmen works and various features off it. In earlier model, we had a little bit introduction to my sequel, Workbench. In this model, we will understand my sequel, Workbench little bit more in that now. The next logical step is to learn about coding and Belinda database. However, before we moved to that one, we need to learn about how we can use my sequel workbench, efficiently toe build over database. My secret work meant is visual data bit designed tool. It is a three main workspace won his development. Second is designed and thirties administration. In this model, we will understand each of them. Little bit, however, will spend more time on development related features off my sequel, Workbench.
MySQL Workbench Features

[Autogenerated] My simple Walkman feature list is very long. It will be impossible to cover every single feature in this model. We will be covering the features, which we're going to use in this course, as well as the essential feature, which is important to do any task in your daily job. My sickle Bachman features can be divided in following areas the tub is development did about designing that of his administration. Did have his migration and miscellaneous. You can see that my future work meant is very feature rich and pretty much you can do every single task which you need to do with my sequel databases. Injectables Development Area. You can do schema browsing, syntax, highlighting addition or update to the results set as well as it contains efficiency tool off snippets that Tub is designing, which is very critical task for any database developer. My sequel, Workbench, offers visual dragon drop modeling. It also helps to reverse engineer from secret script as well as from live database scheme. US in condition and printing. Off models are also very popular. Database designing feature off my secret workbench in database administration area. One can configure any instance as well as do account management, you can turn on or turn off any good habits instance as well as do look file browsing. Additionally, you can use my sequel walked meant for database migration, where you can use any body. Be seated at this complaint database to migrate from one database to another database. Well, this was just a list off my sequel of Open features. Let's see my sequel, Workbench into Action Next.
Starting MySQL Workbench

[Autogenerated] Now. For rest of the model, we will see demonstration off my sequel, Walkman Features, which will be useful to us in performing our daily task with my sequel, You can start My Sickle walked bent on Windows Platform by going to start all programs. My sequel and clicking on my sequel walked Bent application. Upon launching my sequel, Workbench, you will see following screen. This is the home screen off my sequel work Bench on the home screen off my sickle work meant we have three Major What space or section First, Its sequel development, Second Data Modelling and Thirties Server Administration sequel development is the section where we'll be spending most of her time is this is a sequel development course in a sequel development area. We can create databases and run sequel queries in a data modelling will create and manage models. Additionally, we can also reverse engineered database in a server at Mr Shin Area. We can set up various user accounts, browse status variables and several logs. We can also do important export off the data Over here. We will also see how we can start and sit down server in this section on a top part. You can see workmen central click on a narrow and it will expand. We have few off the very important link in workmen central area, like my Sickle Document Library, my sequel, Utilities Database Migration. My sequel, Berg reporter as well is work Bench blog's Let's Start First with sequel development What Space?
Demo: Opening a New Connection

[Autogenerated] in a sequel development area. First, we will learn about how to open new connection and start creating database. Goto the open connection string. Click over here on this connect to database screen will be providing a few off the information so we can connect to the database. First, we'll give a host name. I have provided 127.0 dot zero, not one, because this is my local host and my secret server is install here on a local host with before Port off 3306 The user name is Roop. Now click here for password on a password page. Enter the password, which you provided and me install my sequel. Click. Okay, now click on Okay again, you can see that it has opened Sequel editor for us. Let's go back to home screen before we continue with sequel editor. Now you have seen here how we can open a connection and start clearing. But we're all developer, and we know that there are few connections which we like to say and keep on using it again. Again. We can also save connections in a sequel development area. Let's see that how we can do that. Click on new connection and it will bring up this cream provide over here. Connection Name and provide information for host name, port, user name and password. Quick. Okay. And now, on this screen, you can also paste connection. Click on pace connection, and it will show us the status off our collection and click on. Okay, one more time. Now we're here. You can see the sequel. Authority is new Connection. It is saved. You can double click over here, and it will also open. Sequel Query Editor Now here. Two types in our sequel Editor First Step, which were open few minutes ago. And second tape, which we just open on the second tape. You can clearly see it is Mark with sequel authority label. This labels are very important. I've seen an industry that developer has executed incorrect sequel on a wrong sour with her own connection. Well, before you execute anything, always make sure that label off the connection is correct.
Demo: Manage Connections

[Autogenerated] Well, we just noticed that we have created a new connection, which is sequel authority. As you keep on using my sequel in your production environment and development environment, you'll notice that number of the connection you work with keep on increasing. At one point, you may want to delete, create or modify your existing connection. You can easily manage all our connection from your bicycle. Walked pinch under sequel development area. Go two minutes connections and click over here. It will bring up this cream you can see on the left side. There is a sequel authority connection. This is the only connection we have created so far. Let's click over here. Once we clicked, you can see all the information from this connection is filled up on the right side. You can also configure a few of the old ones. Connection over here by clicking over at one stab is this. A fundamental course will be not spending much of the time on this tape. Let's go back on parameters. Also on the bottom of the screen, you can see that a few options new creates new connection delayed deal its existing connection. Let's create one more connection I'll click on new and new connection is also added on the left side as well is it has populated few off the before, will you? On the right side of the screen, Let's give connection. Name is floral site will keep connection. Merton is a standard TCP. I ___ in horse name. Either we can leave this one s cities or we can provide local host is a host name. We'll keep username route and the password click. Okay. And in this case, we'll also give a default schema videos default schema as secura. Now let's click on Best Connection. Another test is successful. Click Okay, and now you can close this one on the main screen. You can see that now via to databases. One is sequel authority and 2nd 1 is Purell. Sight less gender order off sequel authority and plural site in minutes Connection. Click on manage Connection. And now let's click on Little site on the left side, in store connection area and click on Move up. You can see that little side is now on the top and sequel authority is on bottom. Click close and on the main screen. The order is also changed. Now double click on newly created a little side collection, and you can notice that circular is highlighted. What it means is that circular a database is now by default selected. Now let's go back to home screen.
Demo: Selecting Data

[Autogenerated] Now we have seen how we can manage connection. Let's see how quickly we can to drive data using my sickle workbench from my sequel. Double click on sequel authority. It will open sequel editor on the left side here. Object browser. Right below it. We have information pen, Let's explore, scheme us. Click on an arrow besides Secura and you can see it list down table views and routines. Click on tables and we help Very stable listed over here, right click on actors and select first Option with, Say, Select Rose. And it will spell out Select Star from secular or actor in Grady editor. And on a result bond, we can seethe Select data. You can see how easy it is to retrieve data from my secret database using my sequel, Workbench.
Demo: Updating Data

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how we can use my sequel. Vote Mention. Tow any table data on the home screen off my sequel. Workbench. Goto Any table data I'll select sequel authority is my stored connection and will click on Next. All here. It will give us few. Drop down where we can select our default schema end tables. I'll select the false Kima as Shakira and table as actor. You can select other table if you prefer. Now click on finish immediately. It has opened up table actor. You can also see Name off the table over here. Actor. Now let's go to the very first row and you can see the first row is every table. You can change the value if you prefer. I leave this activity as one. However, instead of panel Ope I will put over here pen lock one click on tab instead of Denise. I will also put over here. Get this one. I'll move to the line number three and over here I'll put Ed, too, and behind chase, I'll put two again. You can see that now have edited Turow's Now You can See on the Screen that I change panel upto panel Open and Denise to Guinness. Man, Do you think this information is committed? What I mean by that is that if I go back and select this data again, do you think I will see Pen Lope and Denise or I will see Panel open endedness? Well, let's go back and check it in. Query editor. Now to write a new Cleary, go to sequel editor and click on creating new sequel tape for executing credits. It will open Court Editor tab. Now let's type in a simple query. After selecting the query, click on Lightning Bolt I can. Over here it will execute the selected portion of the script or everything. If there is no selection, click here and you can see the result is now displayed in result. Tip on resulted. Let's look at the first rope First row says Panel up and _______. Remember, we have changed them. Tow panel up one and Guinness. We expect to see the changes over here, but they're not over here. The reason is very simple. Let's go back to our actor tab and over here you can still see them. Panel open in Guinness one Toby of Change the record over here, we have not committed it. What it means is that the data virtuous seeing is change is only in a query. Editor. They're still not propagated to a chilled it obeys toe. Apply them. Tow the actual database. You have the select on. Apply you can see on the right bottom screen. There is Apply tab, which is highlighted. Now let's click on apply. Apply asked us to review to update. You can see over here it has order. Medical agent rated to update script one is update two circular actor said were first name is panel open and last night, his _______. When it's Colin, all right, you can see it also have a fair condition, but act already is a cold One. Similar thing is also there for a variety. Three. Let's click on. Apply. If we don't understand the select treatment. Don't worry about it. We're going to cover this thing in depth. In later moderates. Click on apply and the screen displays success. Click on finish. Now you can see the apply bottle is disabled. Once again, goto over at hope. Very rich. We have written a few minutes ago and executed one more time when you executed over here, you can see that line Number one is now changed from Panel up _______ to panel a punt and Dennis one similar thing for line number three. It's also add two and taste, too. We all learned that how successfully we can edit the rule in any table using sequel editor On this whole trip, you can go toe any off the cell and double click over here. It will make that cell as irritable. You can edit the cell and make head to toe. Add and chase to toe chase. Now you can see once again there is a play button and cancel button. Ah, plays highlighted. And if lick lick on, apply the egg and cheese will be committed and it will be communicated to the database. If you don't like to changes, which we have done, we can easily click on cancel and you can see they will revert to their original value. Sequel editor is very powerful. We can also edit it one more way. Click on any line and now goto edit. In a result, Ed, click over here and now that particular cell and complete rope is editable. The logic off apply and cancels remained the same in all the cases in the script, we have learned three different way toe edit any dough in Sequel editor.
Demo: Open and Execute SQL File

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how we can edit sequel script in sequel editor Goto. My sequel Vote meant home screen Click on any sequel script. Let's elect sequel authority is Your store Connection and click on Next or Here It Will ask us Please select sequel file. We wantto open I already a creator sequel file, which I'll select from this Browse minion. I selected the File Taste one dot sequel. There is an option if I want to execute this file upon opening also like this one. As I know that place one is safe to execute, I strongly recommend that Don't select this check box If you're not sure about the content off the file Venture opening Now click on Finish. It is executed. The sequel, which was part off based one dot sequel in a Paste wondered sequel, had very simple, select statement. It was selects star from secular dot actor. It will list us all the actors. Let's write another select over here and now we will save this fine, Let's close Best one and now we will open the same file once again. Goto open a sequel script file in a new query tab with his second option in menu Over Here and open faced file. Once again, you can see that that face will not sequel now. Have to select statement. Let's exude them together. Select this to statement and click on Execute. Now let's look at the result pen. On this open, you can see there are two types also over here. One is actor one and 2nd 1 is city to one and two is just indicating the order off the query. How they executed there, Just an indication you can reorder them as well. Actor is now listing all the actor and city is now listing all the cities. Working with sequel enter is indeed very easy.
Demo: Inserting Data

[Autogenerated] now the villain. How we Can Insert Neuro Using sequel editor Go to schema or database Secura. Click on tables rightly Contractors and select Select Rose. It is written US rose from Table actor. Now on the result that you can see on the top bar buries a menu. The first man who stays buried contro, which we're seeing it earlier and now go to the next one that a small plus sign on table breed. There the pop up stays in certain euro. Click over here at the end of the table. It is given us a neuro, Carolyn said. A new I D 1000 name is final. Last name is DeLay and last updated date. Let's put any date now the logic off apply and cancel is still there. Click on apply. If you wantto insert this row, I'll click on apply, and it has automatically generated inside script for us. Now you can see the inside script has been generated. You can see the values when his colon right side. Now click on, apply and click on finish. Now you can see, apply and cancels our disabled. If you go at the end off it, you can see the neuro has been inserted. In the next clip, people see how we can delete the newly inside a draw.
Demo: Deleting Data

[Autogenerated] In this clip, we will see how we can delete any row using sequel editor will be leading the row, which we have just inserted in a previous clip. Click Andro, which you want to delete, and once again you go to the menu off the result plan. Beside the inside Newdow, there's a minus. Sign over the greed click on this menu. I can and you can see the road is disappeared. Please apply. You can see the sequel for Delete is generated. Click apply again, and it is supplied the sequel script to the database. We can finish and let's go down and this time, apply and cancel our disable. Now you can see that how easy it is to select insert, update and delete Rose in my sequel, Workbench.
Demo: View and Edit Column Definition

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how we can view and edit column definition in sequel editor Goto Sequel Development Area. Click on your server and it will open. Sequel editor will be using secular, Simple database for this example. Let's expand it and for their expand table section when a very first table, which is actor right, click over it. And now click on Altar Table Altar Table will open up the screen where we can complete table definition. We can see there are four columns over here that X rayed the first name last name and last update. Additionally, we can see each column names data type as well, Eh? Grady is small and first name is Worker. Last name is Worker and last update is our time stem. If you remember, we talked about the various properties Off column. Now we can also set them over here. First column P K stands for primary key actor Ready in this table is a primary key. The second column is not Knowle COLUMN You can see that actor ready first name and last name in last update. Our normal column. The next column you Q stands for unique index. There is no unique index in this table been stands for binary. If any off the column was binary, the check box in front of that column would have been selected. U N stand for unsigned It a type in this case, small in teacher is unsigned in a type also there to additional property, which we have talked earlier. One of them was default value. You can also selected for Billy over here, said F. Serif sends for Philip Value for that column with zero if it is numeric. If any of this column is numeric, we can just select this particular column and it will automatically defaulted to zero The I stands for auto Implement in this case, the first column Vector I D, which is also a primary key. And it is also auto implemented. If you remember in a previous model, we talked about how most of the time the column, which is auto implementing, is a good candidate for Primary key. If there is any other default value, we can also specify them what here, for example, in the fourth Column but his last update. We have a time storm did a type, and it is not know and the default value is current time stem. What it means is that when we insert any row in this table, if we do not specify what data goes to last update, it will automatically assume current time stem value, which is current daytime. You can further see the translation off each of this column in this area. If you carefully look over here, you can see there are other types as well. The index step talks about what kind of index exist on this particular table. We can also create new indexes as well. A Still IT indexes Over here we can use this foreign keep tab to define foreign. Keep between this table and another table. If there are any trigger, they'll be listed over here and we can further modify them. If table is partition, you can see the logic. Over here we will talk about partitioning in ad musician course and on the last tab began set up various different values for table. For example, here you can specify the auto inclement value. This is the new initial Alterman human value for the table. If you 1000 record in this table, the next record will be 1000 and one. Remember to click on, apply if you want to commit any changes you do with table definition.
Demo: Creating Snippet

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how we can you slip it in my sequel. Workbench snippets are nothing but the library off Sequels in Texas. No matter how expert you are writing sequel queries, they're always moment when we don't remember what was the exact Syntex off particular feature you animal sleeping area. Go on. Um, Icicle worked, bent on a further right. Most I can over here click here, and it will open up. Sleep it area. Let's see a few of the sleeper double click on Select Syntex, and you can see the selects Index is given over here. You can either edit this one and write new simplex over here and click on Done similar way. We have a joint insert of the belief and the blessing. Becks. Let's try to create Sleep it for selecting data from a table. I'll lie down Syntex, over here, which is selects star, and from now I will select this one and click on add Slip it. When I click on this one, you can see there is a new entry over here. Now double click on it and you can see the selected pecs is visible here. If it is select Start from now, click on Done Again. Now type any schemer name followed by a table name. For example. Secura Not actor now, right Click or the slip it and select inside ______ picks at the cursor and you can see it automatically populated. Selects star from and table name, which we had already written. You can just click on Select, and now it will display the data. This is how you can use snippet to expedite writing your sequel queries.
Demo: Output Window

[Autogenerated] Now we will see one more feature off My sequel work meant, which is output tab in a sequel, Litter Gonna Top and select on second most that you see over here, you can see there's a broader output type without any date our here, let's go to secure a database and right click over Ector Table and select few roles output that displaces any created which were executed along with any message. If we have done any syntax error, we can also see that in our output window, for example, here in sort of from I Will Write From's. Now, let's execute the whole query again. You can see that the query is not correct anymore, and Aaron is now displayed over here. Error called 1064 You have an editor in your sequel. Now let's go back to home tape
Demo: Data Modeling

[Autogenerated] So far, we have been seeing features from Sequel development section. Let us see how Data modelling Section works will create a E E R model from existing database. Let's click over here and select our preferred connection all select sequel authority. Click on next, and it has successfully connected to the be amiss. Additionally, it has also deprived Scheme A list from database. Click on Next and you can see All the Schemer, which exists in my sequel database. Let's select Secura and click On Next. You can see on the screen that it has successfully retrieved all the object from secular a schema. Click on Next on this page. It is asking us what are the objects which we want to use for reverse engineering. We can select tables, views Rubens and Trigger just for this example, I will leave all of them checked and click on execute. We can see that it has successfully executed reverse engineering task. Click on next and we can see the success message. No, for last time, click on finish. Here is our e. R. Diagram. Well, currently, all the objects are over each other. Let's select all of them by typing control a now goto orange and click on totally out. It will automatically lay out each of this table along with their relationships. Let's go to city table and click on in Texas. Click on in Texas and you can see there is the only primary key over here. Here. Diagram are very interesting to read. Let's go back to the main screen off my sickle workbench.
Demo: Server Administration

[Autogenerated] now let's in distant couple off. Important feature off my sequel server administration. Double click on the connection, which were already created, and it would open several administration area on the top of the screen. It displays service status. You can see this in for section that name off over Server is sequel authority, and it is running on a local host. Additionally, worsen off the server is also 5.6 point pen. The status of your server is running on a very right side. We can see the system held off CPU and memory. My secrets are our health is also displayed right. Besides it, connections profit very cash into a show, and key efficiency are displayed here. We can quickly see them and get idea off how server health is. Also, you can see there are four different connection, and each connection has different state. One connection has equity, and other three connections are right now in a sleeping state. If there is query, which is taking a lot of resources, you can either kill the query or can kill the complete connection as well. Right below service status there is start up and sit down option you can stop your my sequel server from here as well is started. Let's stop our server and start again. Currently the service status. He's running, Click on stops over, and now you can see Sara, for instance, he stopped. If you want to start the server instance back, you can just click on START Server and it will turn on my sequel. Several instance. You can use this administration screen to do Lord over the task as well. For example, you can collect status and system variables, or you can see several logs. If there are any error, you can find them or hear. Additionally, you can configure my sequel administration's lot of variable over here. There are many important setting in this configuration area in my sequel. Administration course will go over each of this option, and their significance will discuss about logging. In order, be networking, advanced settings, other settings, security related settings, replication, my I S M and performance letter settings. I opens the developer working hard to tune that sequel queries. However, they absolutely ignore this performance step in my sequel administration. There are many option available in this configuration area, which can immediately impact performance very positively. This server admission area also gives you fine control on your users and their privilege. You can take a backup and export your database or import your database and restore your my sequel databases from this. Did that export restore section Let's click on Home Tab and go to the main screen off my sequel workbench. Well, with this, we finish our introduction to my sequel, Workbench.
Demo: Workbench Central

[Autogenerated] Now we understand. Three metres section off my sequel work Bent sequel development, data modelling and Servant administration. Now we will understand for pets central. Click over here and you can see there are various Ling for work with Central. The 1st 1 is My Sickle Doc Library. Click over here and it will open my sequel documentation. You can pretty much such anything over here, and this is great reference. For example, let's search for Alter Index. And when we start for Alter Index, it gave us 24 matches and all of them showed up instantaneously. Let's do another search. Let's search for create database. There are more than 50 results for create database. If you're doing my sequel code N if you're stuck, I strongly encourage you to refer my sequel work Bent Reference manual. There a good chance that it will solve all of your problem. Let's close this and goto home Ted. The second link over here is my sequel Utility. When we click over here, it displaces list off my sequel utilities. They're very important. For example, there are utility for identifying difference or reading administration or doing import or export. Let's close it and here is the link for database migration. When you click over here, it opens my sequel, Workbench Migration. Result. This result. Assist us in migrating table and data from supported database system to my sequel. You can also use this one to corporate database from one My sequel. Instance. Toe another My sequel. Instance. Let's close this one. Similarly, we can submit my sequel, Bug from my sequel, Vert Mint itself, as well as for additional tips and tricks we can read Workbench Blog's Now we're back on the main screen off my sickle workbench. With this, we conclude this model and Moto summary.
Summary in Sixty Seconds

[Autogenerated] somebody in 60 Seconds. My sequel, work Meant, is divided into three major sections. Sequel development, data modelling and server administration. We can retrieve you Edit or Billy Data from sequel editor Off Sequel Development section. We can create Devils model as well as Reverse Engineer database from Data Modelling section. We can start Stop Manage My sequel instance from Server Administration section. Remember, we can use my sequel, Common Line Editor. If we have no access to my sequel Workbench, you can download my sickle work meant from the Ural displayed on the screen.
Data Retrieval Techniques
Introduction

[Autogenerated] Hi. This has been all the way for polluted site. In this model, we will discuss about various data retrieval techniques for any I. D. B. M s. Data retrieval is the most essential task in an earlier model villain. We can use my simple workbench to retrain and modify data. My sequel worked. Bent is a great tool for developers who helped build with the data for any application. We ought to write scripts in sequel to retry or modify data. A sequel stands for structure Kredi language. In this model, we will learn how to court, select statement and deprive data. It is very important to help proper understanding off how selects statement works and its building blocks. All the concept which we learn about Select statement applies to update and delete statement, which we will explore in the next model off data modification. Let's start to understand the basic off select statement, and its most essential building blocks were ordered by any limit
Basics of SELECT statement

[Autogenerated] developer. You select statement for various purpose. Here are the least of the few of the example where we use select statement. Little aesthetic value. Pretrial All the data from table to try all the data ordered by single column written selected columns from table to drive. Data with filter condition returns the date of it. Filter condition and order by multiple columns. Pretrial Empty little set. In this model, we will see examples off this Pezuela's funereal world scenarios. Let's start with understanding Basic Centex Off Select statement. A basic selects statement has fight closes select clothes. It displayed the column in diesel set from close names the base table from which to Grady retrieves data. We can also use views here, but that's at once concept. We're close. It specify the condition that must be met for any road to be trapped in results at order by close it specify how to sort the rose in diesel set. We can have one column. All multiple columns by which we can order isn't set. Limit close. It specify the number of the rose to return. Sometimes tables are very huge and it's important that we re trial only limited number off the rose for various reasons in basic simplex off select statement were not included. All the closest in this basic syntax off select statement. For example, having clothes, having close filters, data based on aggregate functions. In our advance course, we will be talking about aggregate function. At the same time, we will explore having clothes and also understand difference between very close and having clothes. Now let's see select statement in action.
Setup for demo

[Autogenerated] before we start with our demonstration. Let's understand the set up required will need my secrets over my sequel, Workbench and simple database tequila. In my case, I've used my sequel installer for Windows, and it is by default install my secrets ever workbench. An older, necessary, simple database. You can use either of the matter, but make sure you do practice all the demos which you see in this course. Now open my sequel Workbench. Click on yourself her name, and it will open. Sequel editor. This is the screen where we will be starting most of the demos on the left side. On Object browser, you can see we have secular, simple database installed. Most of the demos off this course will begin with the screen.
Beginning SELECT statement

[Autogenerated] well open my sequel. What Bench? And let's start with simple examples is discussing Ugly, a setup clip. You just need secular, simple database, my sequel, Workbench and my sequel server. Let's start recording together. Let's do I select my first Real You. My first really is a string, and let's select that and see what result comes up. Click on execute and you can see my first value is now displayed over here. The name of the column is same as the value, as we have not specified any Elias. Let's like a less as some value. Now let's execute the same thing again, and you can see name of the column is now. Some value and value is my first. Will you similar thing you can do with arithmetic operations over here. Select one plus one and let's see the fun. You can see that value is now two, because one plus one is two. However, name of the column is one plus one. Let's give it a yes over here. As to now, let's execute it one more time and you can see now name of the column is, too, and the value is also too, in my sequel. You can also get Karen date time by using function. Now. Let's learn. Select now. The result displays with current date and time. If you just want only date part and not the time part, you can just write Select car date. Let's execute this, and you can see only date parties displayed and time part is not displayed any more. If you want only time similar way. You can write select car time and it will displace current time and date. Part is no displayed. You can also display the value of pi by using select by fires in but function. Let's execute it and you can see the value of pi is displayed here. 3.14 15 93 Well, you can do other mathematical function. Israel like finding remainder when you divide 45 by seven, what will be the remainder? Well, less than select more 45 Coma seven. And it gives us remainder s3. Another interesting function would be to just find square root off any value. Here we have specified 25 square root off friend. If I ease five, let's execute this and you can see it has found square root off 25. It is five you do not need from where order by closes if you are just doing some simple operations.
Demo: Select without FROM clause

[Autogenerated] well open my sequel. What Bench? And let's start with simple examples is discussing Ugly, a setup clip. You just need secular, simple database, my sequel, Workbench and my sequel server. Let's start recording together. Let's do I select my first Real You. My first really is a string, and let's select that and see what result comes up. Click on execute and you can see my first value is now displayed over here. The name of the column is same as the value, as we have not specified any Elias. Let's like a less as some value. Now let's execute the same thing again, and you can see name of the column is now. Some value and value is my first. Will you similar thing you can do with arithmetic operations over here. Select one plus one and let's see the fun. You can see that value is now two, because one plus one is two. However, name of the column is one plus one. Let's give it a yes over here. As to now, let's execute it one more time and you can see now name of the column is, too, and the value is also too, in my sequel. You can also get Karen date time by using function. Now. Let's learn. Select now. The result displays with current date and time. If you just want only date part and not the time part, you can just write Select car date. Let's execute this, and you can see only date parties displayed and time part is not displayed any more. If you want only time similar way. You can write select car time and it will displace current time and date. Part is no displayed. You can also display the value of pi by using select by fires in but function. Let's execute it and you can see the value of pi is displayed here. 3.14 15 93 Well, you can do other mathematical function. Israel like finding remainder when you divide 45 by seven, what will be the remainder? Well, less than select more 45 Coma seven. And it gives us remainder s3. Another interesting function would be to just find square root off any value. Here we have specified 25 square root off friend. If I ease five, let's execute this and you can see it has found square root off 25. It is five you do not need from where order by closes if you are just doing some simple operations.
Demo: Retrieve all the data from table

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how we can you start and reply all the data from the table here is example Select Star from secular thought actor When we use a star and do not provide any filter condition using where this statement will retire, every single column and every single roll from secular dot actor table, select the statement and click on execute. You can see it is a traveling. All the four columns and all the 200 rose from secular adult actor table. Let's take another example. We can also read Dr All the Rows and all the column from Secular Adult City Table. Select the statement and click on Execute Well, if you noticed we're using secular dot city name this'll Aiming Convention is database dot table name. If you don't want to keep on using secura in a name off the stable, you can use another technique. For example, here I'm using you Secura. When we execute this statement, it will by default. Secular database is a database for every subsequent execution off statement. Let's see that into action, but first, pay attention on the left side. In Object browser, you can see circular taste and world. All three have similar phones. Now let's execute Use tequila when you execute this one at that time now secularize highlighted or bull. What it means is that now secular is the full context for every single execution. After the statement, when we execute this one, it will destroy the same data which we got from Select Star from secular DOT City. Used it on his name is a good idea to execute. If you know every subsequent execution you are going to do from same database, let's close this. And now in the next clip civility tribe all the data order by single column.
Demo: Order data based on a column

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how we can to try all the data order by single column. For example, here is Solich, star from Circulatory Actor, which we have just said it has four columns act ready, first name, last name and last update quickly glancing at results said We can see that first name column is not order alphabetically. So as last name, we can quickly order first name in alphabetical chronological order. If we write order by first name right after select statement, let's select the statement and execute it. Now we can see that first name is chronologically ordered. Adam is 1st 0 is at last Interesting enough. That name off actor is zero similar way We can order the same table with last name. Let's execute the statement. Now you can see that the complete table is ordered by last name Column is on the top and see is at the bottom. Well, currently we're just seeing them in alphabetical order. However, the order is ascending. We can also change this sequence order by just adding descending close. Let's execute this first statement where we have first name as descending in order by close when we execute that we can see now zero is on the top and Adam is on bottom. What happens yet is that by adding order by column name and descending close now in prayer table is order descending by first name column We can do similar thing with last name as well. Let's execute this statement. And now entire table is ordered by last name. Descending order by close is very handy and very easy to use. Now. In the next clip, we will see how we can to try selected columns from table.
Demo: Retrieve selected columns from table

[Autogenerated] So far, we have been re training all the columns and all the rose from the table. Now we'll see how we can to try only selected columns instead of driving all the columns. For example, let's see. Select star from secular dot actor. Therefore columns first insect riding. Second is first name last name and last one is last update. Now it's quite possible not everybody needs last update data. Some people may only want to see first name and last name. Well, we can do that very easily. Instead of writing started, we can just write first name and last name and select data from the stable will write Select first name Coma, Last name from table name _______ secular dot actor. Let's let this and execute. Now you can see we're getting data from only two column, which is first name and last name. There are many reasons to spell column names instead of writing star. However, the primary reason for that is performance. Additionally, not the data which every trifle, first name and last name is not in order. If you want to order them, we can just specify order by close over here in this case, I'm specifying order by first name Descending. Let's select this statement and execute it. Now we have first name and last name Colum ordered by first name descending. In this example, we have seen how we can filter columns and we try only the columns which we need. In next demonstration, we will see how we can further filter rose as well.
Demo: Retrieve selected columns and rows

[Autogenerated] In the earlier example, we fritter columns in this example level filter Rose selects star from table name drives every single row and column from people. You can see that in this example where I'm retrieving all the data from secular dot actor table here, let me introduce new clothes, which is We're close. We're close is nothing but condition in later part. Off this morning, only we will understand we're close in detail. However, this is a simple example. Let's leave the statement from the start Select star from secular dot actor. What it means is that now we're going to get every single row and every single column from secular dot actor Table. Now let's read the next line where act ready is credited 100. What it means is that now we will only retrial from secular actor Table those rose where Grady is credit than 100. Currently our circulatory extra table has 200 rose. Now we're talking about the traveling rose only where X rated is greater than 100. Let's select this statement and execute it. You can see that in a result, our data start from act ready. 101 let's quickly school down and see if there any date of it is less than 100. A quick inspection demonstrate that there are no rose, which has actually I decrypted then 100. What it means is that this were condition has filtered out row where Grady is 100 or lesser. Now let's change describe her than to less than NC. What result it brings to us. After executing, we can see that we have actually won. However, let's see what is our maximum actor, i d. The maximum is 99 because here we have air conditioned where we have specified that were vaccinated east less than 100 you can not, is that writing their condition is very simple and it's very into two. Let's see next example in this example. Now they're filtering out fourth column, which is last update. We're only selecting act ready first name and last name. We have changed here. The air condition. Now I'm mentioning where first name musical to Nique. What it means is that now we will literally only those row. Their first name is equal to sneak from the table secular dot actor Let's let this statement and executed. We can see there are three records over here. All three record has first name is Nick. However, last name is different. Additionally, the fourth column off Last updated, is also not visible. Over here, it was very easy to see how we can filter rows and columns.
Demo: Bringing it together

[Autogenerated] novel. Further. Continue over same example and see how we can filter columns Filter Rose as well as order record set with multiple columns. Let's start with very simple example. Here we have select Star from secular adore actor were first musical Tonique. As we have seen, we're going to get four columns because they start and credos because we have first never physical to Nick. Let's execute it. And, as expected, we can see now for columns and three rows. Let's assume that we don't need last update column will remove that now we will not You start instead of that will specify actor ready first name and last name. While we do that, we will also add one more tress. Currently, we're getting our data _______ Esper Act ready, Ascending Let's change the sequence and we want now Data _______ order by actor Eddie Descending. What it means is that we want our very first record to be 1 66 and very last record. Toby too, if we can easily do that, if we specify only three columns in a select statement and additionally we provide order by actor Eddie sequences descending, Let's let this and execute you can see. Now we're getting 166 as a top record and two s bottom record. Currently a result is ordered by only one column, which is a Chraidi. Let's make it more complicated. How changed the air condition and I'm driving once again activated. Discredited 100. Here we have order by first name, which is ascending and last name, which is descending. Additionally, we have three columns which is act ready, first name and last name. What it means is that we have all the elements which we'll learn together. In this single query we air filtering by columns. Additionally, we're filtering by Rose. Also, we're ordering this completely still sat by multiple columns, which is first name and last name. Let's execute this and now we have results set. We can clearly see that every single record in cross column back Brady is over 100. Additionally, let's pay attention to the first name. You can see that first name Adam is on the top and William is on the bottom. What it means is that first them is order ascending alphabetically. However, there is also last name which is ordered descending. What it means is that after the first name column is ordered alphabetically ascending, my sequel will pay attention to Last Name column. Let's see an example. Look at this two line. We have first name Borden and last name is Nota and Jackman. You can see last name is now order descending because N comes first and J. It's now coming later on. Here is the example where we ever sell. If you think off alphabets, you can see the bee should come first. However, we have order last name descending. What it means is that now he is coming first and later See and be so. My sequel has first ordered complete data. Esper first name ascending in later order completely Sell said by last name descending. Let's see a tricky concept. Next, we're really trail empty results set.
Demo: Retrieve empty resultset

[Autogenerated] Let's see it. Ricky Example. I sinned Lord of the Operating Select star from table name, where they just want to see what kind of column table has menu and select star from table. It will pretty much the trial, every single drone, every single data from complete table. This is not a good idea. If you just want to know what are the names off the column? The very quick trick would be over here is to just right where one is equal to two when you right where one is equal to two. At that time, my sequel will not get a new any data because one equal two is always a false condition. It's good to understand that you can write this kind of pretty and get empty isn't set. With this step, we complete our learning off fundamentals off Select statement. In next clip, we will understand advance conceptual. It'd to select statement
Working with Arithmetic Expressions

[Autogenerated] Now we will see a demonstration how we use magnetic expressions as well. Let's call Amelia sees bite If l'm icicle gives column in the results that the same name is the column in a base table. However, for business need, we can specify a different name. Known is Paul Amalia's. If a column is best, gonna tell. Create values by before the name of the column is the complete expression. This automatically assigned expression is usually very difficult to read as well as right. It's always a good idea toe Assign a column Elia's to a column, which either has a calculated value or very complicated name. We will see that in a demonstration later. This clip, my sickle, it will lose any arithmetic expression from left to right. The Order of Presidents is as follows Multiplication division in Peter Division, Modelo edition and subsection. If your multiplication in addition in the same expression, my sequel will first perform multiplication in later addition. When we're reading from left to right, we forget the importance off order of precedents. If you want over confusion, it's always good idea to use. But in Texas, parentis is awards confusion as well as gives you expected results. Athletic expression involving multiplication division. Any ship and subsection are very common. Modelo or remainder or in Peter's division are not commonly used. A romantic expressions. We will see the next demo how we can use this various arithmetic expression in my sequel queries.
Demo: Arithmetic Expressions

[Autogenerated] Now let's understand the concept. Ophelia's with example. Let's first patrol few column from secular daughter until table. Select the statement and click on Execute. You can see we have retired three columns, rental date, invent reality and return date due to any reason. If you do not like this column names, we can just change them for changing column name. We just have to only ask them, for example, in this Lake statement. Rental date is original columnist We can just say rental date is Trent Till date in a Camel case, and now this is over. Elia's similarly, for inventory in the School i. D were also Lessing. It as film List i D for return date. Tellus is return date in Camel case Let's select the statement and executed You can see the results said that original column names are now replaced with Call up. Elias is, however, the data of it is being displayed right after the header title. It's sane and there is no difference at all. So in other word, aliases is just another name for any off the column. Well, there is not much of the importance of Elia's at this point of time, however, Aaliyah's becomes very, very important when we're dealing with arithmetic expressions. For example, from circulated film table were retrieving three different columns and to off them has arithmetic operation. Let's like the statement and execute it. You can see the column. Names are very wide. The most is easier to fix. This problem is to just let us a column. Let's see that. Now you can see this example I help Ellie assed replacement cost minus rental rate s cost if Lent divided by 60 is now Elias s time in our let's execute this statement and you can see that column It is much lesser and it's very easy to read. You can see in this select statement were used various different mathematic operators, for example. We have plus multiplication and substructure in. However, to make this more interesting, our views parenthesis that a different place select this entire statement and now click on execute. You can see that arithmetic operation on original column changes the complete meaning off the column. Now let's see one more example. Let's elect this particular statement and click on execute Here you can see each column has a different value. You can see The original column replacement course is now at last with replacement cost in camel case. Right after that, it is divided by five off. A result will be the similar. However, if you don't want the similar results, we can just used word deal. It will give us in Pisa results. We can also find very quickly Modelo or remainder off any value. For example, here we have value 20.99 when it is divided by five we're getting the value is 419 age. When we use the D function, it will only give us in picture part off this decimal value. In this case, it's a four. In this case, it's too in this case is three. Here There is a 12.99 when we divide that but fire, our remainder is 2.99. Now you can see how very sad automatic operation come together with the Regula Select Statement and start building intelligent data
Select statement and other functions

[Autogenerated] So far, we have seen selected aggregate functions as well as doing some static operations. Now we will see how we can use select clothes with various other functions. For example, we will see functions related to numbers, strings and dates. One of the interesting challenges we develop ahead is to eliminate duplicate rose from other results that you will see that how easy it is to eliminate duplicate rose by ending simple keyword distinct. Now let's go to my sequel workbench, and we will see each off this interaction.
Demo: Select statement and other functions

[Autogenerated] here we are back in my secret vote paint, and we will see demonstration related toe in teacher string and date functions. If you see the list of the older function in my sequel, the list is extremely large. It just impossible to cover each and every function and explain them in a single course, however, will see few of the important functions in this demonstration. Once you know how to use one function in select statement, you can go and use any other function in select statement as easily. Well, very first, See how integer works. Here is the statement where I am returning data from payments table. Let's first select the data, and later we will understand what each of dysfunction do. Select the statement and click on Execute. Now you can see vo five Different column displayed in nobody's upset. Very first column is amount you can see amount is directly retrial as it is from payment table. We have not modified or apply any function over it. The second column over here is using ground function. Down function rounds up around down any of the decimal value to nearest in teacher, you can see 2.99 is converted to three and 0.99 East converted to one. If you scroll down, you will see the similar examples over here and the third column one second we're use round function. However, this time we're specifying second perimeter over here. Second parameter, we have passes one. What it means is that when you round up around down at that time, display information. Still first the similar. For example, over here, you can see now one is 1.0 to see them further in direction, let's take one more example where we will not use any from close but right. Ever take any intel value and try to apply round over it. Let's write, Select brown and function. Now let's pass here, will you? 4.5 and let's execute it. You can see it's now rounded up to value. Five. If we pass 4.99 it would still round up to fight. However, if he passed 4.49 it will round it down to the four. Let's go back to our statement and executed again. Now you're to malfunction to look at it floor grounds down any of the value to the nearest lowest in teacher. Very ceiling down sub. Any value. The arrest hiring teacher. Let's see example, Over here we have only 2.99 when we applied function floor Over here, it has rounded it down to two. And when we apply selling function over here, it is rounded up to the tree. Though they look very simple, these are very important functions and comes very handy when we're dealing with numbers.
Demo: Select statement and string functions

[Autogenerated] In this demo, we will see how we can do some of the very common sting operations with string functions, for example, joining to string and making it a single string. One of the most common task every developer faces is to can't get two strings. For example, if your first name and last name if you want to display a full name, you just have to come get two strings. My sequel is in Bill Function, which we can use to just can't get string. For example, here we help Can't get function. Begin past multiple parameters. Over here, I'll pass three perimeter. First is first name space and last name. Now let's execute this one. Select a statement and click on Execute. I only asked the column as full name under the full name column, you can say now first name and last name are displayed together with space between them. You can see how easy my sickle makes it to join two or more strings. If your needs to just display initial of the person, you can do that using my sequel as well. Here is the second example where have used function called left left Next to parameter First is a string, and 2nd 1 is how many characters you want to select from the left side. Here, I'm applying left function on a first name as well as on a last name and bought the time. I'm just selecting one character. When we learned this complete select statement, you can see that along with the full name. Now we're able to see the finish. It's currently initials has a space between them because I have left space over here. If you remove this space and coma and executed again, you can see that now Initial does not have a space between them. Similarly, there is a function called right, which will just select the right most rose. Currently, we're selecting only one character. Let's make it two for first name and last name. Now let's execute it one more time. You can see this time that we're getting 1st 2 characters, first name and last name, for example, via selecting be from panel up and you, for Kinney's similar thing is for Nick. We're selecting, and I and for Wall Bug, we're taking the blue as we know that we're selecting only two rows from first initial and last initial. The string, which is built for initial, have a fixed land. However, in case off the original first name and last name, we really do not know what is the length off this street. We can use function land. I can figure it out. Let off over first name and last name together, for example. Here I'm concluding, mating, first name and last name and applying land function over it. Let's execute this complete statement. And here it is. For example, Nick Walberg has 13 character, and Jennifer Davis says now 40 corrected. One of the function is reverse. What it will do is that it will take the complete string and diss players in the reverse order. We can use this function to figure it out. Palindromes. Let's execute this one now. In a result, set, the first column is full name, which is the original full name You can see Nick Walberg is over here, but when we see the river's full name, it is now spell backwards. For example, last characters G is the first character over here, and second last corrective shoes are is now second character Over here. Let's examine over replace function. For example, in Jennifer Davis, we have s as a last character. When recently replaced example, we can find Davey and dollar sign because of our s is not a place with dollar. Similar thing is also there with Grace Mostel. In this case s is once again the place with dollar You can use this liver cell, replace function and can do a lot of different things. Next we will see function related to date and time.
Demo: Select statement and date functions

[Autogenerated] Now we will see some of the functions that that to date one of the most use function is date format function. Every country and every geographic region has their own format. When we're dealing with an application which is using a multiple country, were to carefully pay attention to the date and time in our daily routine and another application Wien in a different part off the date sometime in it, too. No state part, and sometimes we just need time apart. Let's see some of the date and time functions right now. Let's see this very first script. Select the statement and click on Execute. And here you can see the date is first and the month is in middle. Also, one of the other difference between this two column is how eerie spell. If you look at the last column, it's also very differently. Formatted. Even the date and time are the same. The way it is displayed are different. In my circle, we have a different mask for date and time, for example, when we have empty and why in the smaller letters each Mattoo month, day and two digit here. If we just kept realized why it means now four digit ear similar way. If you want your month to represent with three corrective string, you can just use small be capital T stands for the time, and AFS stands for precision off the time. If you search for function date for men In my sequel documentation, you confined detail off each and every mosque available for date format. For example, a stands for every waiter weekday name. Where is small? It's time for our capital. Let stand for now are as well, but in 20 for our system. If you want day off the week, you can just use small the blue, and if you want pick their name, you can just use capital W And if you go further up in um, icicle documentation, the whole section is dedicated to functions and operator, and over here you can find out various numeric function and operator as well String functions. Here is the entire list off string functions and operator, which you can practice out each one at a time. Similar way here is the list off string functions. Let's go to next crypt. Now you can see that we can change this mask and build the date and time for Mitt as we want. Let's go to next clip. Here is the date for May. It's quite possible that we're not family with each country or its zones at the time. We can use a very interesting function, which is great for May. What gate for meadows is that instead of specific mask, it will automatically get the form it based on your date and time from the zone, which you specify. For example, let's execute this. Select the statement, click on execute now of your four columns and you can see on a very first column. If you carefully pay attention to each of this column, you can notice that they have the same value. The reason is very simple, that get format When we used with the date time for Europe, I S O or USA, it gives us the same time for May. Now I replaced it Time with time and let's execute the script again when you execute this crypt again. Now you can clearly see that all the column has a different information you can see over here. The column Noble one and last has pretty much same information, however, date and month are stamped in a Europe. The date is always first in U. S. A month is always first and in higher. So for mint, you're in a four digit month and date. Let's first we execute the script, and later we will understand the output. You never result. Pan, we have fi ______. First is mental date, which is the original date time and other four columns. The date is May 24 2005. It was 1/3 week off the day and it was in a second quarter, as monkeys may. This particular month was 21st week off the year. Well, my sequel has a different function where it will give you the off the weak quarter of the year, week of the year and name off the month. You can just use any of this function and pass your daytime is one of the parameter. It will give its output, which you are expecting with this the end of a clip. But you can notice that how easy it is to use various function in a select statement and can get desire output
Demo: Select statement and distinct rows

[Autogenerated] now in this demonstration, we will understand how distinct you were impacts. Credit is all set before we execute. Query that Sanibel output window. Go over here in my sequel Workbench, and click it here to display output Window well. First execute Select first name from secular adult actor. Select the statement and Click will execute. You can see the results set over here. Israelis can not. Is there a 200 rose return from this query? Now we will execute Second query only difference between First Query and second query is distinct. He would we have additionally added distant keyword because now we want unique first name from secular adult actor. Let's execute this one. And this time you can notice that we only received 100 potatoes. What it means is that there are 70 records which were duplicate Now Duplicate records are eliminated and we can only see distinct result sets. Let's run it again for last name. Select last name from secular adult actor and click on execute from results said You can clearly see that Ellen last name is there Multiple time. Israel is berry now, Mulan. Another select statement. Very help distinct keyword right before the last name. Select the query and click on Execute. Now Ellen is only display once. So is Barry. If you look at Output Window, we can see that when we selected last name from secular director at the time my sequel. It in 200 Rose. However, as soon as we had a distinctive word, it has returned us only 123 room. We can use the sting with multiple column as well, less with Starr. The purpose of the distinct is to return Unique Rose, based on a column used in a select statement.
Introducing WHERE clause

[Autogenerated] but for months is very crucial dimension for any application. So far you've seen in, most of the cases were retrieving pretty much entire table for our purpose. For that, we use select start from Table Syntex. We also learned that we should note retrial columns, which we're not using in our application and use column names in the select statement. Instead of fusing Select star, there should not be need off all the rose off the table. Most of the application in most of the cases needs only a subset of the rose from the people. We can limit the number of rows patrolled by query by using their condition. It is important that we understand how to use their condition very carefully as it will help us tremendously when we're dealing with very last table and we want to retrain only rose, which are required. Let's understand few off the condition which we can use inner wear clothes
Select statement and Comparision Operators

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how we can use various companies and operators into wear clothes, frickin use companies and operators to compare any two expressions. My sequel is good at converting data for comparison. However, It's always good idea to help both the side off cos an operator to have the same data type if the result of the companies and it's true, Throw being tested is internal inquiry results set If the results off comparison is not true, those are not in today is a partof results that if you're comparing numeric value, we will not need single court. If you're using string date or similar kind of data type, we may have to wrap our value with single court. We will see that and understand that into demonstration. Let's the list off. Various companies and operators equal less then greater than less than or equal to credit than or equal to not equal and not equal. Let's see all of them into action
Demo: Comparision Operators

[Autogenerated] Here we are in my sequel. What Bench In Sequel Query. Editor. Let's see some of the example how their clothes works with comparison operators. First, we will see how Equal Opener works with Indigenous and String will be using Secular dot actor Table for this demonstration. Let's not select the were close and select Select column name from secular adult actor. Click on Execute. We can see that it has returned us and type able. Let's also enable output window in output window. We can see it has returned US 200 rose. Now let's execute this entire _______ with their condition where act ready is equal to 100. Select this row and click on execute. You can see an output window. It is the trail only one draw and Ruiz actor. It is equal to 100. Instead of selecting entire table, we should be passing where condition and select grow, which is needed. Here we're comparing column name, wit, string operator, as mentioned earlier Foreign teacher, you do not need a single quotes around it. However, for string, you need a single court around your perimeter. Now let's select this crazy and execute it. You can see in result, penetrates drived us three row and similar is also reflected in our output window. This various return us every single actor. Where's first name is equal to Nick. The implementation of companies and operator Equal toe is pretty straightforward. Now we will see how operate unless then works instead of using equal in a We're close. I've used less. Then what it means is that now we will get all the actor who has activated less than 100. Let's select disc ready and execute. Now we have 99 rows and when we checked, the actor radio in Results said, you can clearly see that it is less than 99. None off the ECT Brady is over 100. This is how we can use the number where condition less than operator. Let's execute this query and understand the result. Please pay special attention. The first name. When I scroll over here very quickly, you will see the pattern that there is not a single name, which is starting with any later, which comes after an in alphabets. Now let's understand greater than operator and we will understand the same example little bit more in depth in other select statement in a very condition we have a radio is greater than 100. Let's exhibit this and see the results. Set Query has written 100 rose. When we see the results said, we can see a ready start for 100 it goes all the way till 200. Any record with activity less than 100 is no more included in this results that in case of the second query, where we help first name credit the Nique select the statement. Click on Execute Now let's grow results set in this Desert said you can notice that every single name in the column first name will be after Nick if their order alphabetically. However, in the boat, the cases off credit and in less than we have noticed that the decorating 101st name Nique was never included in the results sent beckon me scenario where we need actual 80 100 Israelis. First name Nick All Central is a part of results set. We can do that if we use less than or equal to a Preta. Let's see that in this case in diesel plan, let's go down all the way and you can not, is the very last night is actor Eddie School to control what it means that this query has intruded 100 every value, which is less than 100 for actor i. D. Similar logic also applies toe first name less than or equal to Nick. Let's like the statement and click on Execute. Now you can see that factory physical unique is all century. In other results, set right away. Same logic also applies if you're going to use redder than or equal to operator. Now let's execute discredit. You can see that we have now trading 100 as well as every act ready over 100 then execute. Discredit any name alphabetically after Nique as well as it includes first name Nique. Well, now you know how most of the comparison operators works. However, there is one more companies and operator which is very important to learn nautical toe, not equal to negates the condition which were provided into their clothes. Let's understand that with an example in this case, we have condition where X Ray D does not equal to 100. What it means is that we will get every single desert where actor Eddie is not cool toe 100. Let's execute disc ready and we can see that now via 199th row in results set if you scroll down and try to see between 99 101 there is no road 100 because actor is equal to 100 should not be encouraged in avarice and set a similar case with first name Nautical Tunica's Well, let's execute this _______ and you can see Nick was activated to. It's not included in this query. If you scroll down all the way, you will not find name is equal to Nick, you'll find results that containing every other name besides Nick. Well, with this, we complete of understanding off comparison operators. Let's go to our next concept off logical operators.
Select statement and Logical Operators

[Autogenerated] So far, we have seen in a fair condition that we're using simple such condition. What it means is that we take one column name and try to compare it with string or indeed, a literal. However, the real world scenario is much more complex than this. We sometimes help more than one condition to compare invalidate. At that time, we need logical operators. Logical operators helped their condition to become compound condition. We can use multiple logical operators and can build complex where condition, for example, here is the list off popular, logical operators, and or and not and operator is true. If all the conditions in wear clothes are true or a printer is true, if anyone off the condition in very close is true, where is not is negative logic. What it means is that it will reverse the logic which we have used previously. Sometimes not, operator is tend to confuse developers because off readability issue, I suggest you write a logic in such a way that you don't have to use not condition. Well, To understand this, we have to see a demo. Let's open my sequel work meant and see them into action
Demo: Logical Operators

[Autogenerated] Here we are in my sequel Workbench in Sequel editor. Let first see how an operator works. Here is a simple example from secular dot actor table. We're going to retry all the records were first name is equal to Connett. Select the statement. Click on Execute. You can see there are four rows retired over here. Let's make it a little bit more complicated. In very close, we had one more condition, and the condition is that actor ready should be less than 100 now. If you carefully observe over, Diesel said, you can see that a three record, which is activated less than 101 record, which have traded credit and 100 now because of this new addition in a wear clothes of results that would not have four rows but it should have three rows. Let's execute This injector isn't sad Now. It's very clear that in other results said, we don't have Active lady, which is greater than 100 even though the first name is Can it besides having first name can it? An actor, idealist and 100. We have added one more condition where last name is equal to taunt. Let's execute this inject the results that you never incredible. This is the only road which satisfies all three condition, which is specified in We're close now we will see how or logic works. First we'll see a simple example. And will it try all the record? First name is equal to Can it? Now you can see we have to try for Rose. Let's make it a little bit more complicated, and we add one more or into over. We're close right now or suggest act already. He's less than 100. What it means is that now our query should return. Everybody was the first name is equal to can it as well any activity which is less than 100. For example, looking at this condition, we know that falling four rows will be part of the results that when we look at this condition independently, we also understand that there will be additionally, 99 Rose also part off where is upset and there is always chance off over lip. What it means is that we'll definitely get all the record with actor Eddie is less than 100. Israel is one additional row where a car ready Easter than 100 is 1 69 because it qualifies for condition. Were first name musical to claim it. Let's validate of a resumption by exhibiting discredit. And let's go down at the bottom of the results that we can see that we have to try every room which has activated less than 99 as well. They try draw 1 69 because it has first name musical to can it, and that is also one off our condition. Now you can see never wear clothes were added last night Musical to Temple. What it means is that any road which is first name esque, Annette or last name s Temple or actor rating is less than 100 will be qualified for a result set. Let's execute that and scroll all the way to bottom. Now you can see that we have additional grows where last night musical to Temple and all of this role has traded greater than 100. Well, now let's move over next, logical or better of it is not well, not. Conditions are very simple condition. They just negative the logic which we have used in a very close Let's see this example. Here's your specify factory physical to 50 if we don't have a Not what it means is that this query will return. US. Results were activated is equal to file, however, because we have used not just right before our condition. What it means is that this very will return us every single drizzled where we don't have activities going toe five. Let's execute this query. Invalidate of a resumption well in diesel said Pay attention Toe Activity column. There is no row between 24 26. What it means is that this query is not return us any result where actor I d is equal to fire. Remember what I mentioned earlier not sometimes confuses the user or developer. If there is very complicated logic, you can rewrite this crazy without using. Not as well. Look at this example here instead of using not I've just changed the condition from equal toe. Do not equal to, and this query will also return us absolutely same result. Now we have understood all three off over logical operators. Now let's put all of them together and understand with much more complex example. Here is our first example. They're used and and or together let's execute disc ready and we have the ____ seven rows. You can see this query has retired us. Everybody was a first name is can it? And activity is less than 100. Additionally, it has also tried all the record. Their last name is equal to Temple. Remember one more thing which we just discuss few minutes ago, which is logical Operator, President's logical operator. Presidents is not an and or what it means is that Andy's eluded first and or is he really dead right after it? In this case, these two conditions very violated first and later they were ordered with this condition. Let's send this order of condition and we will see that we will get absolutely different result than what we have just got over here. Now here is the second Freddie. What we have done here is that we just took this or and moved it a little bit before end. And and actor I D is now right after or condition s for the president's off operator and will be voted first. What it means is that these two condition will be well. It'd first. These two conditions will be voted first and later they will be ordered first musical to can it. Even though board the Crazy has almost similar condition, they have very different meaning. I selected a _______ and click on execute. Now this Grady has returned us every record. Their last musical, to name an actor, Eddie, is less than 100. What it means is that anybody was. Last name is equal to Temple, but act ready is greater than 100 is not part off this result set. Can it is in your condition. So anybody who has a first name musical to can it will be always part off this result set and hence be able to see activities 1 69 with first name, as can it. Also, part of this is all set with the conservative just discussed is very, very important concept, and I strongly encourage all off you to execute this query on a secular, simple database. Now let's make it a little bit more complicated and take this example to the next level will start using parenthesis to over logic, which we have just seen. Here are two example Let's execute this first very first and you can not is this query is very similar to the our initial Kredi. If you do not use parentis, is in this logic, it will still give us same result. However, it's not true. In this case you can not. A sword here via parent is around activity, which is less than 100 last name, which is temple. When you select everything together and execute, you can see that will not only get the results were first name is equal to Can it Funny enough you went over your condition will last musical temple. None of the rope qualifies because now we have additional condition to our original Jesus said, which say's firstly musical to can it. There's an order. Single actor was last name Temple and first name Can it? Now you can see the power of Prentice is an order of precedents, how they play together and keep on changing of a result. Well, with this, we end our logical operator section and let's move to the various other operator related to fair condition
Select statement and WHERE clause

[Autogenerated] very close is one of the most powerful close in entire select statement there. Lots of interesting element which we can use in very close to make it interesting to learn, for example, in phrase figure news, interest to test whether expression is equal to the value. In the least, the order off element in the list does not influence the final result san. Additionally, we can use subcommittee in in closed as well. During demonstration, we will quickly see an example off. The same innit won scores will cover this concept in detail. Vickery was not operator to negative logic off in phrase between phrase qualifies threw off the results said When an express it falls within the range, the lower and the upper limit rains express. EMTs are also part off the range. Just like any other operator or phrase we can use not too negative results set. We can use like operator to retry Rose that matches a string pattern. A strength burden is called a mask. You will also understand how wild card percentage and underscore helps to build this string pattern using demonstration. Additionally, we can use not cured before like and may get the entire logic. No, he's one of the most interesting concept within database are seen developers often getting confused with Earl. Incorrect implementation off no brings unexpected results. No values sends for value that is unknown or unavailable. It is not a zero or not an infinite in sequel. We can't compare null by using equal to operator you to use special clothes off is no and is not. Now when you use this close of results that contains value based on this logic, let's quickly jump to a demonstration and understand this concepts.
Demo: Using Between in WHERE clause

[Autogenerated] Let's open my sequel Work meant sequel, editor and let's start with our very first example First will understand how in works. Once again, we will be using secular adult actor table Select star from secular dot actor, where first name in Nick, Johnny, Joe and even what it means is that this very well written result where first name is any off this name. Let's very find that. Select the statement and click on Execute the day today off our little's Where String. That's why we have single court around them and they're all separated by coma. If the dinner type off our little isn't teacher, there is no need off single court rounder. Let's see example of that as well. Here it is. In this case, we have Littles, as in teachers. We do not need single court around that or we're condition is where actor ready in 123456 and seven. Let's select the statement and click on execute. You can see the results said. We have all the result that actor Eddie is 123456 and seven. Well, the implementation of it is very simple, as you can see that now we will quickly see the example off the sub query. On a very first glance, we can see there are two different queries over here. First quit Is that where we're selecting Star from Secular Detector, where first name is in Nick, Johnny, Joe and even, and there is your condition Over Here, which is looking for actor Ready in. And then there is a second query. Let's read now. Second Query, which is select Act Ready from Secular Detector, where last name is equal to be generous. Let's execute disc ready and see what is it? Sizzle said. And we learned this result said, We can see the utensils three Distinct really, which is 41 1 of seven in 1 66 What it means is that there are three actors whose last name is de generous and direct. Brady's 41 107 and 1 66 that simplifies this query a lot. What it means is that select star from secular actor, where first name is in Nick, Johnny, Joe and even or Actor Ready in 41 107 and 1 66 What it means is that we will get every record. Their first name is either Nique, Johnny Joe or even additionally, there will be Rose, where decorated will be 41 107 and 1 66 To validate a resumption, let's select entire query and click on Exit carefully observed the first name column off the results that you can see the name belongs to Nick, Johnny Joe or even officially, that should be three record where activities go 41 1 of seven in 1 66 in case of ____ Tracy, 41 we can clearly see it's over here. Actor ready to 59 14 and 40. The Logic Waas first name belong to our four names in case off that crazy 41 The last name was de generous, and that's the reason it qualified for this result set. Same logic is for one of seven as well. This record qualifies for both off the conditions. What it means is that if we had a condition instead of four and here iterated 1 66 will be still the village is upset instead of or right here and now we will execute this and you can see only one record is Now you know what isn't set. This record is here because the first name is Nick and the last name is de generous. Now let's understand how between close works. But before that, let's execute a simple creedy select start from Circulatory Viktor. Director ladies go to the pen and actor Eddie is less than 20. What it means is that it will get us every single act ready, which is over 10 and less than 20. Let's select this. An executive in other results said, Be hel nine. Does Directive ready is from 11 to 19. Here is an example. Select Start from Secular Detector were Grady's between then and 20. Now let's like this one and execute. When we execute this record, we can see that there are no more nine throws. The total number of the rules are 11. The difference between this query and the query, which will end before our road with activated 10 and drove it checked already 20. The reason is that the weather between works is that it also includes the boat, the ranges. What it means is that the pen is also part of the range and twenties, also part of the range the way the range logic works in case of the between is lower inch, upper range and anything between them. If you want to simulate this query with using between, you'll have to change here something instead of pen. You're to replace that by 11 and start off 20 you to replace that by 19. Now this Grady will be exactly similar to the query, which were executed in the beginning. Just like this, let's go further down. You can just put not before between, and it will just negate the complete logic over here with the use off north Cuba. Here you'll get every single room where actor ready is lower than 11. An activity is greater than 19. Let's we'll let that select the statement and click on Execute. Now let's go further down and you can see after 10. Right after there is a value 20. There is no other value in between. It means rose with that trade 11 and more and grows with decorating 19 unless are all committed. You can see the between can be very powerful friend. We have to deal with strange
Demo: Using Like in WHERE clause

[Autogenerated] Now we will see how like operator works like is very powerful and interesting because it works with patents, using pattern logic and wild card, you can pretty miss Bill in finance combinations off the logic to use in a rare condition. Well, let's start few of them over here. Here are some of the example 1st 1 is select start from secular adult actor, where first name is like a and percentage wild card. This one pretty much released every single actor whose first name starts with a person that Mrs one or more characters. Let's execute this one and you can see in other results, said every single actor whose first name starts with a. However, if you want to make it a little bit more interesting, we can select only actor whose first name starts with A and L, which means we should get a ____. Albert Albert is here to time, which means act ready 1 25 And actually 1 46 should be also part of what result. Let's execute this one, and we will see here we have air conditioned their first name like a L and percentage in, Diesel said. We're all doctor was first name. Now start with all that. We can make it more creative as well. Here is an example we have used to underscores Underscore stand for a single character. The pattern which will return here is the first character is a second and third can be any of the character. However, the fourth character has to be E. Let's exhibit this one and see how many the courts qualify for this pattern. When we execute this, we can only find one actor who qualifies for this kind of pattern that is any because the first character is a We do not care about second and car collector, however, if the fourth character has to be. Additionally, when we write this kind of pattern, it means we're looking for four character string only. However, if we just put percentage right after it now, what it means is that we can help first character a second and third. We don't care. However, the fourth character must be when we put percent dates right after e. It means now we do not care how long this particular string is. Well, let's execute this one and see if we find any Attar. With such name, you can find there are many Angela, Angelina, all but Angela and Albert again, along with over original record off. Any you can see in all of this, there's a single pattern. First character is 1/4 directories Eve. However, we do not get the length off them as well as we don't get what is the second and third correct is, let's further continue fortify the same pectin here instead of putting to underscore. Now we have the place to underscore with single percentage. Now what it means is that the first character is a and there's a percentage between A and E. What it means is that it doesn't have to be any more. The four character. He can be any corrector after a and there can be any number of the character between a M E and we do not care about them. Additionally, he does not have to be fourth correct row last character that can be more correct, right after percent it as well. What it means is that find the name, start with a and has e anywhere in the name except first place. Let's execute this man and you can find many of the records. Now you can see the petition off is not fixed in this guest stern and in this case is the second last again case of end. It's 1/4 and case off Angela. It is also fourth. Well, now there is no real logic where the is going to be. However, you can notice that a is always the first character. Now let's go to our next conservatives about now. As we say, Nelle is very interesting, and it's very important to understand how nuts behave. We cannot use any arithmetic or logical operative over null to compare null, which is hard to use. Special Cuba of it is, is no or is not. Now let's go to our address table and select every single record from it You can see in Coolum address true, therefore, records which are none and other record How empty string. Let's go to over second query and run it. Please pay special attention Here. The very condition is address toe is know what it means is that every record were addressed to is none should be part off little sad. Select the query and executed, and you can see, there are four records over here. That address toe is now. If you want to make it this condition, select the query and execute. And now you will get every single room where address toe is not know. Well, logic of the Nile is very interesting and not start playing very crucial role. When we start using outer joints with this, we finish our demonstration regarding we're close now. We will go to our next concept off order by close.
Select statement and ORDER BY clause

[Autogenerated] the order by close specifies. So daughter off the results at the sort of that can be ascending or descending. Additionally, we can sort results said by one column or multiple column. We can also use various expression in order by close as well. Order. My clothes is the only clothes where we can use Elias to sort columns as well. Additionally, we can use column number to specify short order as well. Whatever clothes has a very special behavior, it null values. No values always appear first in a sort sequence. It does not matter if you're specify sort sequence, ascending or descending. Additionally, remember that you can short any color in a base table, regardless, if you use that one in a select statement or not, let's see some of the interesting examples off how order by close works in next demonstration
Demo: Select statement and

[Autogenerated] Now you open my secret vote meant and sequel editor. We will be seeing example how order by works. Let's start with very simple example. Here it is. Select Star from Circulatory Address order by district. Select the statement and click on Execute in, Diesel said. Pay attention to the District column. You can notice that district column is now ordered alphabetically in ascending order. Abu Dhabi is on the top and Julia at the end. Now, if you want to reverse the order off this column, what it means is that you want Julia on the top and Abu Dhabi on the bottom. You can easily do it if you just specify descending keyword in order by close. Here is the example. Let's like the statement and click on execute. You can see that now Julia is in the top, and if you score all, the red bottom on Abu Dhabi is at the end. Now let's see another example where we have more than one column in order by close. Let's let this one and execute. Let's take example Abu Dhabi itself. You can see that the Buddha bees on the top. It is order in ascending sequence by columnist. If you pay attention to the postal code, you can see that higher numbers on the top and Lord number is on the bottom. What it means is that in this window off Abu Dhabi, my sequel has one second sorted postal courts. However, the order of the postal court is descending. Hence you can see the value of it is higher on the top and the valley, which is lower on the bottom. Similar example is also here. In Edna, you can see that higher number is on the top, where lower number in a postal card column is on the bottom. Now let's see a different example. Here it is where we have ah expression in a select statement. You can see that here we have activity from secular actor table and we're contracting first name and last name, and we're releasing first name and last name. As for lame, we can order this complete table by expression using a select statement, for example, we can use this can't get in or order by close as well. Let's like this complete statement and execute. You can see that now complete table is now order by expression which you specify in order by close to make things simple. We can also use Elias in order by close as well. You can see here that instead of fusing expression, we're using the Elia's, which were given in select statement in order by close Let's like this one and click or execute the results said is very similar to the one before. However, it's very easy to read and easy to write, as instead of writing company expression, we can just replace it with Julius. Well, there is one more trick I want to show you here in order by the _____ Digit to pitch it to stands for column number two, which is in a select statement. What it means is that actor Eddie is column one and concrete expression is column to Let's execute this one. You can see that the results of his order by second column _______ contaminating off first name and last name. If we remove these two and put over here one, it will be ordered by actor Eddie. Let's see that. Select the statement, click on Executive, and you can see that now complete results. It is ordered by actor Eddie column Well, personally, I do not like this matter because this method can create ambiguity when we're using star or when we have scheme a change or some developer ads column in a select clothes. I personally prefer to use complete expression or Elias off the column in order by close. Well, with this, we finish our understanding off order by close.
Retrieving limited rows

[Autogenerated] Now we have reached a very last concept which we want to learn in this model, which is limit close. We can use limit close to limit. The number of those written by select statement disclose usually have one or two arguments. Each of them has different many and we will understand them while we do demonstration. It's always recommended that we use order by along with limit because there is no guarantee when we use limit that we're going to get the data in the same order in every subsequent execution. Off the same select statement. The very frequent use of this limit close is when we're doing paging. Think about this way. If they're 1000 role in one table and now you want o re trial only road, which is between 500 find a 10. How would you go about to training them where this is the time where you use the limit close? Because Lim Close has to argument. One is number of the rose and 2nd 1 is offset. Let's quickly understand both of them in demonstration
Demo: Retrieving limited rows

[Autogenerated] here we are in my secret documents in Sequel editor, and we're going to see how limit Cheever works. As mentioned earlier. Limit Keyword is pretty straightforward. Keyword. Let's first drive data from secular adult actor that we have order by close on extra I D. Let's go and apply limit 10. What it does is that when we execute the statement, it will only retail 10 rows. However, what happens if you want to re trial data, which is somewhere in between the table? What it means is that you want to retry row number 32 35 or throw number 50 to 65. At that time. You can additionally specify, offset to the limit close. This is how it works. Look at this example. We're here. Limit 15 and 10. Well, this has two parameters. Let's execute them and understand what each of this parameter do. When you execute disc ready, you can see that the first record is no more Actor 81. It is now actually 16. The first parameter, which you provided to limit Cuba, is offset. What it means is that if you specify a year, 15 bicycle will skip 1st 15 lines and we'll start reading the lines. After that, he had a a specified 10. What it means is that it's only going to retry 10 rows. Let's send this number and see one more example for that. I'm going to put your 25 number of the rose I'm going to put five. What it will do is that it will started driving rose from room number 26 will try till row number 30 because we're going to return only Firoz. Now let's select this one and click on Execute as we expected. It is retiring US fighters from the actor Eddie, 26 onwards is Lim Close limit. The number of the road retreat rise from the offset. It also helps with performance off Orel Server Health Well, but this we end our understanding off data travel and its various closes phrase and operators. In next model, we will see that our modification techniques and now the end over this model with somebody in 60 seconds
Summary in Sixty Seconds

[Autogenerated] somebody in 60 seconds. Select Clothes describes the column list in the results at From Close Describes the table names from which the credit he tries the data were close. Describes the condition to match for Rose to qualify for results at order. My clothes described the sword order and sequence for results that limit clothes, described the number of the rose results, set returns and offset off it. Use column names in select statement instead of start to reduce ambiguity and impact performance. Using aliases improves readability. Use various companies and zoological operator, and we're close to retire. Rose three Lemon to application. Always used order by clothes if you want your results set ordered.
Data Modification Techniques
Introduction

[Autogenerated] Hi. This has been all the way for little site, and in this model we will discuss about the time modification techniques. Our major focus in this model will be on insert update and village statement. It update and village will be also using were close. All the operators and phrases which were learned in earlier model will apply over here. As it is, each of the statement has to clear distinct area. First area is how to modify a single room and second area is how to modify multiple rows. Also, it's not a good idea to modify your life data for the same reason. I'll be creating a simple table and we'll be doing all the operation on top off simple table. Let's start with inside statement.
Insert Statement

[Autogenerated] feels insert statement When vo ed one or more rose to a table to inside a single row, we can specify inside command with table name and column Lee's followed by the data which we want to insert. Also, we can use the Lexx statement to populate another table as well when we want to insert multiple rows at the same time, same logic applies. We can use one inside and multiple value clothes or select statement which returns us multiple rows. There are two important things to keep in a focus by learning about ______. Statement one is default values and second is no values. We will understand all of this thing in demonstration next.
Demo: Insert Statement

[Autogenerated] Let's open my sequel apartment and sequel editor, and now we will see few off the examples off how inside works. But start with creating simple table, and we'll be in setting all the data into this simple table. This is how we make sure that we do not upset Live data will be using database. Secura will create a table, which is actor simple. It has traded first name, last name and last update. Activity is small in Teacher, and it's unsigned. However, it's not null and its auto incriminating as well, not specify any other properties off it'll implement. It will start with one and will incriminate the value off the column by one as well. First name is worker, and it's not. No last name is no, and last update is time, same data type. And it's also not know. However, this important property define here, which is default. The default value off this column is current time stem. What it means is that if we do not specify any value to be incident for Last Update column, it will be automatically populated by current time stamp. Let's start with our very first example off Insect. Let's execute this one and you can see an output it has already created table for us. Now we'll start with very simple example where we will insert single row into the table. The script is insert into table name, secular dot actor. Simple were specified here. Pre off over column Those are first name, last name and last update, please. Not that we're not specifying here. Column Act ready. The reason of that is very simple. It's going to be auto implement. What it means is that we do not have explicitly enter data into this column as and when we insert data. This will be auto populated by auto increment property off a column that's the example of that as well. We're going to use value closed right after the ______ statement in the value close, we're going to specify the property first name on specific penal. Last name is the way and last update as any date. Let's like this one and click on execute. You can see an output close. The message is one dro affected. Now let's check the data into the stable, select select start from table and click on execute. You can see there's inserted one drawer, which is Actor 81 because it's the first will you first name Penal, last name David and Last Update date, which we have just specified, is another inside. We did not specify any of the time component. It is by default. Assume time component off 0000 Now let's go to second script. Here is a second script. Let's complete this one of the 1st 1 you can see there are two major differences. First, is that a no column list in second script, and the second is the false specified Over here. Let's first execute this one, and we'll talk about that afterwards. Click on execute and now check the data. We have successfully inserted the second row and it says new pulled away in a date. If you notice it's the same data which we have just inserted, However, in earlier one, we did not specify actor ready because trade Iwas auto populated. However, when we're in serving their time to table and not specifying the list off the column at that time, we will have to specify every single columns value in a value list as well as it has to be in the same order as the original table. What it means is that this default stand for actor ready Newport for first name and the way for last name, as well as the data, which we specify is for the fourth column column. Order has to match to the original order. If I change the order off the way in a date, it's not going to insert the data properly, and it may give us better. If we do not specify default. My secret will also given error. When we specify the default, it will go and pick the default value for this column. In this case, the default value will be auto implemented. An auto implement will be adding one to the additional value. As we have not specify any other auto increments data. That means we will have value to over here. Well, let's continue the next example in this example. You can see that now we are only two columns were inserting data won his first name, and 2nd 1 is last name, and the date average we're in serving is spin all the way. Let's think for a moment what would happen in this case In case of the first name, the value panel will go in case of the last name value that we will go what will with a belly off last update. Let's go and check the value in our table definition in table definition were specified. The last will you is off data type, time stem and will have different, really off current time step. What it means is that if we did not specify the last update, it will automatically take the current daytime off the server where my sequel is installed. Let's execute this invalidate of a resumption. Select the statement, click on, execute and now select the data from table You can see over here that third record isn't studded with first name Penal Last Named away, and the date is current date time from my system. Now let's go to next script and understand that in our next trip, we only one column specify he never insert statement, and the value is penal. There is no value for last name as well as last update. An actor ready? Let's try to guess what will be the value in each of this column. Well, in case of the EC Brady. Once again, we will have auto instrument failure and we will see four in case of the last update. Israel notice we'll ever current daytime off server, but what would be the value off the last name? Let's go to our column definition one more time and see what it will be. You can see last name column is defined is not. What it means is that if we pass any value to this column, it will take that value. But if you do not pass any value to this column, it will just take. That is no. Well, let's execute this. Invalidate that. Select the statement and click on Execute. Yes, we have expected activities for first name is banal. Last update is Karen Daytime off the server, but the value off the last name caller is no. Isn't this interesting that sometimes you feel that we have to specify every single column? But as we start narrowing down, we learned that there are so many things which is dependent on the definition off table, which we have defined earlier. That is why data modelling is considered is one of the most challenging task. No, let's try to do the same thing with last name. The way here we are not specifically the first name, but we're only specific. The last name. What do you think will happen? Let's go all the way up and see here. The first name only say's It's not. No, there is no different, really specify. What it means is that this column has to have a value. If we do not specify what to be inserted into this column, my sequel will not let them tie wrote to be inserted into this table. Let's see that into action. Now we select the statement and click on execute and on the bottom over here, you can see that there is an error. Error says First Feel does not have a default value. What it means is that if you do not have a different value, you will. How to insert some data in it? You cannot just walk of a without specifying any value for the column, which is markets not null and does not have a default. Well, let's see one more example. Insert into table name columns, first name, last name and last update. The value penal will go into first name and none will go into last name and different will. You will go into last update. What will happen, you would hear is that we will see in a first name column Will Epinal in the last name null and last update current daytime off the system. Let's select the statement and execute it. Now we'll go and check the data into the table. You can see activity five is over here and first name is spinal. Last name is now over. Service default Daytime is in last Update column. Now let's go a little bit more advance and see how we can insert multiple rows. So here is the example where we will see how we can certainly people values into table first. But that is very simple and very easy to implement. We have insert into table name and column, namely, stayed over here in value. Close your first column and coma and second column in a coma and Rio Hard column. We can help more than three columns over here as well. With this kind of Syntex, we do not have to specify. Insert statement again and again. Let's execute this one and now select the data scroll down and you can see now we have three records instead, it which is paneled away with date 17 Newport away with date 18 saving the way With date 19 there is one more method where we can use selects statement inside data. For example, If you want to insert all the data where actors first name is Nick into this table, we can use this kind of Syntex. Let's see the select statement first. Very conceivably have three names with actors. First name is Nick. Now we will just right inside statement just on a top off this select statement In insert, we have three columns. First name, last name in Last updated in case off the select statement. Let's elect everything and click on Execute Enemy Execute. We can see that at three toes. We charge it returned. Let's go and check the data Select Start from actor Sample and click on Select Let's scroll down all the way to the bottom. You can see that there are three new records which are inserted, which is Nick Wahlberg next alone and Neck Region breasts. Well, you can see how easy it is to insert data into table by using select statement. Let's going up and drop the stable now. In the next leap, we will learn about update statement.
Update Statement

[Autogenerated] we can use update statement to update one or more rose in a table. The set close enough. The statement will contain Name off the column and its new value. Where is Faircloth's will have a condition which qualifies rose to be updated to a new value. Just like inside, We have a concept of before and null here as well, and the works? Almost exactly. Same. Let's see. Update in Action Update has many variations. For example, update single row and single column update, single row and multiple columns. We can also a bit multiple rows in single column or a bit multiple rows in multiple columns. We can use select sub query in update statement as well. Let's see all of this into action now.
Demo: Update Statement

[Autogenerated] Now let's see up. The statement into action will be using circular database and will be creating our test. Um, table. You want to make sure the table which we use does not modify any off the life or production system. The table, which we're going to create is almost same table which were created in our insert script. Lee can create table script and click on Execute. This script is very similar to the script, which we're using over in such statement, demonstrations click on Execute and now New Table, which is secular door actor. Simple, is populated with the same data off secular adult actor first with Dylan about update single row using single column. Here is the update statement where we're updating secular adult actor. Simple said keyword has a first name. Every single rule in the first column will be no populated with penal. What we want to do is that the only one to update the really off the first record were accurate. T is equal to one now we're limiting our great toe only one column and one draw, and now, before we check our data will do the same oppression with the last name is Well, what it means is that well, now update the last time column to value the way Directorate is also one. Let's select this one and click on Execute. Now let's go back and check our data. The value off the first name is Spinal and the Valley off. The last name is the way. Now let's move further. In earlier example, we have updated first name and last name separately. We do not have to do that. We can update first name and last name off single row altogether, for example. Over here, I'm going to update the road where activity is a girl to do with first name penal and last named away. Please note the current will use a Nick and Walbert. Now let's execute the script and do select on the table. You can see the old value is now replaced with fennel, and the way this time we did not have the right to separate of the statement. To update a single room, we can update a single room with multiple column by specifying all the column into set close. Let's take this one into next level. Get fully observe the we're close we're close has activity and list off the actor I d. What it means is that every actor I d with value 34 or five will be now updated with value Penal. Let's execute this and check our data upon checking off data we can see this change also happened over here. Well, what we did is that he specifically list and multiple row were updated for a single column. We can take it to the further next level. Very update multiple columns and multiple rows. Here is the example here Be aware condition where activity in 67 or eight. Which means these other three rows which were discussing over here we're updating first name with penal last name with the way and last update with the phone, will you The phone will you will populate Karen date time off the server in the column Let's select this one and click on execute and now check the data in. Diesel said we can clearly see that 678 row has now panel devil you everywhere and last update date is updated to current date time. Let's see one more concept here is the concept off using subcommittees you're up That statement we're updating Circular door actor simple and setting value. First name to the poor and where condition has actor I. D. However, let's pay additional attention to the We're close here we have sub query in ever wear clothes. Let's execute the subcommittee independently and you can see the supple is returning its value off. 1 10 2040 50 and so onwards. This are the least of packed already who all work in a film might be one. What it means is that all the sector working a single film which has filled my musical the one. Now we will change the first name off every single actor who has acted in tow. Film. One. Two new poor. Let's execute this one well executed, not happen successfully, and we can see that in better record. 1175 you are using safe a bit more and you try to update the table without were close. No, we're definitely using a wear clothes, however, by default, my sequel Workbench walks into safe more in Let's change that. Let's go to edit and goto preference. Go to sequel queries and here and check safe Abed additional It also requires us to do re connection. I unchecked this option and click on. OK, now click on this icon which suggest reconnect to D. B. M s now once again tried to run this crazy. This time, quit is then successfully in the designated pain Rose. Let's go to our table and check the data in it. We can see the very first race now updated to Newport because actor, it is called one was also acted in a film I d. One scrolling down. We can see another value where Grady is 10. Now you can see how easy it is to update single and multiple row. In my sequel, we can use complex logic in a were close as well. A subcommittee to a bit of a data. Let's do cleaner and drop over table. Next, we'll see another important concept off. Delete
Delete Statement

[Autogenerated] this statement is one of the most powerful statement. It can relate every single growing your table pretty much with one line off Syntex. However, we should make sure that we're using a very close with Gillette's statement. So video late one or moral from table. Instead of deleting every single roll, we can also use sub Pretty and select statement to Qualify Row. So delete indolent statement. If you forget the were close well, pretty much delayed every single grow from the table. Let's see all of this concept into action next.
Demo: Delete Statement

[Autogenerated] Here we are in my sequel Workbench in a sequel editor, and we'll see example off till it's statement will be using secular database. And now we'll create very similar table, which we have created in earlier examples. Table is actor simple and has four column act ready. First name, last name and last update. Click on Execute and Table is successfully created Now will populate the table with secular dot actor. Table will be using inside statement inset into secular dot actor, Simple column names and will be returning the same column from Secular dot Better Table. Let's execute this one. And now we are our simple table ready, which will use to exercise of a billet statement. Let's see your very first example here. We're going to delete a single row. First, let's select our data. You will say in our data that our first role is actually one and first name is final and last night, Mr Way, let's execute the statement where we have delete from table name where actor Eddie is equal to one. If you look at the statement, the structure from from is very similar to select as well. Let's update click on execute. And now, once again, check your data. We can see that in data packed, ready one row is now deleted. Well, let's go further down. And this time, try to delete multiple blows together. We're going to use list in we're close. Where act ready in 34 or five. Let's let this entire statement and click on Execute up. When selecting the data, we can see that we know more. Herro 34 and five. This is how you can use were close in a select statement to delete one or multiple rows. However, just like update statement, you can be created with sub query in village statement as well. Here we have a sub query where we're selecting all Dr Eddie Walk in a film. Mighty one. Select the statement and click on Select. You can see very a sect ready Over here. Act ready 10 2030. Let's remember them for a moment and our deal. It statements A's delete from table name where actor riding into this all actor ID's Let's select entire statement and click on execute Upon checking the data into table. We can see that now we do not have recorded 10 20 or 30 over here. They all got deleted because we executed this toilet statement. You can observe the deal is statement is extremely easy to do. Just missing aware condition is capable to delete entire table as well. Let's see that in our next example here, we do not have anywhere close. What it means is that now entire table subtle adult actor simple will be deleted. Select the statement and click on execute. If you're paying attention over output Window, you can see that it displays 187 rows affected. Actually, they're all deleted. Now. Let's go to select Star from actor Simple. Click on Execute and we're getting no toes over here. The reason was that we did not use the wear clothes, and that's why every single record from Theis Table has been deleted. Well, with this be complete of a demonstration for data modification. Let's clean up by executing the statement, and now we will see somebody in 60 seconds
Summary in Sixty Seconds

[Autogenerated] somebody in 60 seconds. You still excitement in sub query when inserting, updating or the leading multiple rows at the same time. Do not forget to specify very close in delete or a bit statement, or it will modify your entire table by default. My sequel. Workmen, Friends in a safe a bit more, preventing user to make accidental updates the simple safe more only when required.
Summary and Resources
Final Words

[Autogenerated] Hi. This is been underway for little sight in this model. We will talk about summary anti sources. So far, we have learned installation off my secrets over my sickle walked Bent and my secret simple databases. All of this component and all other components are installed by default. Later, we learn my sequel, What Bench and three off its major sections. Sequel development. Very connected to existing databases and rail sequel queries. Data Modelling where we created and manage E. On Models Server Administration, where we configure database server and set up user accounts. Later, we spend time on relational database management system and database design concepts. We also learned in depth various techniques for daytime travel. In detailing travel techniques we focused on select where order by and limit closes. Finally, we spend a lot of time on data modification techniques. We learned how we can modify our data using inside a bit and believe Well, here are a few of the important resources. Well, I thank you very, very much for spending time learning with me. My sequel Fundamentals, Part one in part off my sequel Introduction. The villain joins functions, views, transactions, stored procedures, store functions, triggers and events. Thank you, and we will meet in my sequel introduction Part two
